<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Faust's Two Souls</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="container">
            <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
            <div class="flex-grid">
                <aside class="col sidebar">
                    <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
                    <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
                    <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
                    <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
                    <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
                    <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
                    <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
                </aside>
                <section class="col main">
                    <h2>About</h2>
                    <p>In Goethe's Faust, Faust explained that he possessed two souls - one that sought
                        divinity, purity, and the higher powers of Nature, while the other was driven by sensual
                        pleasures and earthly desires. For example, in Scene 11, Faust showed the struggle and
                        clash between the two souls as follows:</p>
                    <ul>
                        <li style="list-style-type: none; text-decoration: underline;">Earthly</li>
                        <li>Hold! hold! It will!—If such my flame,</li>
                        <li>And for the sense and power intense</li>
                        <li>I seek, and cannot find, a name;earthly</li>
                    </ul>
                    <ul>
                        <li style="list-style-type: none; text-decoration: underline;">Divine</li>
                        <li>Then range with all my senses through creation,</li>
                        <li>Craving the speech of inspiration,</li>
                        <li>And call this ardor, so supernal,</li>
                        <li>Endless, eternal and eternal,—</li>
                        <li>Is that a devilish lying game?</li>
                    </ul>
                    <h2>Research Question</h2>
                    <div>
                        <p>As shown in this excerpt, Faust was in a constant struggle and underwent conflict
                            between his earthly soul and divine one. These two souls were in clash and each
                            tried to dominate and supress the other. Therefore, they were not equally
                            represented throughout In other words, each soul sometimes dominated some scenes
                            over the other but it was difficulty to quanitfy each soul's representation and knew
                            which soul had the overall domination. This project, therefore, seeks to analyze
                            Faust's actions, thoughts, and wishes throughout Part 1 of Faust, and find which of
                            these souls each act, thought, or wish aligns with. </p>
                    </div>
                    <div> Our research question for this project is: <ul>
                        <li>In the light of the two souls' domination and representation, How many times
                            does each soul reveal itself in Part 1?</li>
                        <li>Are there some scenes are more dominated by one of the two souls over the
                            other?</li>
                    </ul>
                    </div>
                    <h3> Method of research</h3>
                    <p> In order to answer these questions, we used the follwoing technologies xml, schema Relax
                        NG, XSLT, HTML, CSS, and SVG. We tagged Part 1, which includes 26 scenes. We traced
                        Faust's speeches throughout the play and classifies each of his sentences as an either
                        earthily thought, wish, or an action or a divine one. Then, we used XSLT to show the
                        graphs and SVG to show...</p>
                </section>
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
