<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene V</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>V. AUERBACH'S CELLAR IN LEIPZIG</h1>
               <hr/>
    CAROUSAL OF JOLLY COMPANIONS
    <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Is no one laughing? no one drinking?<br/>
            I'll teach you how to grin, I'm thinking.<br/>
            To-day you're like wet straw, so tame;<br/>
            And usually you're all aflame.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Now that's your fault; from you we nothing see,<br/>
            No beastliness and no stupidity.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
        (Pours a glass of wine over BRANDER'S head.)
        <p>
            There's both together!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Twice a swine!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            You wanted them: I've given you mine.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Turn out who quarrels—out the door!<br/>
            With open throat sing chorus, drink and roar!<br/>
            Up! holla! ho!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Woe's me, the fearful bellow!<br/>
            Bring cotton, quick! He's split my ears, that fellow.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            When the vault echoes to the song,<br/>
            One first perceives the bass is deep and strong.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Well said! and out with him that takes the least offence!<br/>
            Ah, tara, lara da!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Ah, tara, lara, da!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            The throats are tuned, commence!<br/>
               </p>
        (Sings.)
        <p>
            The dear old holy Roman realm,<br/>
            How does it hold together?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            A nasty song! Fie! a political song—<br/>
            A most offensive song! Thank God, each morning, therefore,<br/>
            That you have not the Roman realm to care for!<br/>
            At least, I hold it so much gain for me,<br/>
            That I nor Chancellor nor Kaiser be.<br/>
            Yet also we must have a ruling head, I hope,<br/>
            And so we'll choose ourselves a Pope.<br/>
            You know the quality that can<br/>
            Decide the choice, and elevate the man.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            (sings)
            Soar up, soar up, Dame Nightingale!<br/>
            Ten thousand times my sweetheart hail!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            No, greet my sweetheart not! I tell you, I'll resent it.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            My sweetheart greet and kiss! I dare you to prevent it!<br/>
               </p>
        (Sings.)
        <p>
            Draw the latch! the darkness makes:<br/>
            Draw the latch! the lover wakes.<br/>
            Shut the latch! the morning breaks<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Yes, sing away, sing on, and praise, and brag of her!<br/>
            I'll wait my proper time for laughter:<br/>
            Me by the nose she led, and now she'll lead you after.<br/>
            Her paramour should be an ugly gnome,<br/>
            Where four roads cross, in wanton play to meet her:<br/>
            An old he-goat, from Blocksberg coming home,<br/>
            Should his good-night in lustful gallop bleat her!<br/>
            A fellow made of genuine flesh and blood<br/>
            Is for the wench a deal too good.<br/>
            Greet her? Not I: unless, when meeting,<br/>
            To smash her windows be a greeting!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
        (pounding on the table)
        <p>
            Attention! Hearken now to me!<br/>
            Confess, Sirs, I know how to live.<br/>
            Enamored persons here have we,<br/>
            And I, as suits their quality,<br/>
            Must something fresh for their advantage give.<br/>
            Take heed! 'Tis of the latest cut, my strain,<br/>
            And all strike in at each refrain!<br/>
               </p>
        (He sings.)
        <p>
            There was a rat in the cellar-nest,<br/>
            Whom fat and butter made smoother:<br/>
            He had a paunch beneath his vest<br/>
            Like that of Doctor Luther.<br/>
            The cook laid poison cunningly,<br/>
            And then as sore oppressed was he<br/>
            As if he had love in his bosom.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS</b>
        (shouting)
        <p>
            As if he had love in his bosom!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            He ran around, he ran about,<br/>
            His thirst in puddles laving;<br/>
            He gnawed and scratched the house throughout.<br/>
            But nothing cured his raving.<br/>
            He whirled and jumped, with torment mad,<br/>
            And soon enough the poor beast had,<br/>
            As if he had love in his bosom.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS</b>
               <p>
            As if he had love in his bosom!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            And driven at last, in open day,<br/>
            He ran into the kitchen,<br/>
            Fell on the hearth, and squirming lay,<br/>
            In the last convulsion twitching.<br/>
            Then laughed the murderess in her glee:<br/>
            "Ha! ha! he's at his last gasp," said she,<br/>
            "As if he had love in his bosom!"<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS</b>
               <p>
            As if he had love in his bosom!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            How the dull fools enjoy the matter!<br/>
            To me it is a proper art<br/>
            Poison for such poor rats to scatter.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Perhaps you'll warmly take their part?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            The bald-pate pot-belly I have noted:<br/>
            Misfortune tames him by degrees;<br/>
            For in the rat by poison bloated<br/>
            His own most natural form he sees.<br/>
               </p>
    
    FAUST AND MEPHISTOPHELES
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Before all else, I bring thee hither<br/>
            Where boon companions meet together,<br/>
            To let thee see how smooth life runs away.<br/>
            Here, for the folk, each day's a holiday:<br/>
            With little wit, and ease to suit them,<br/>
            They whirl in narrow, circling trails,<br/>
            Like kittens playing with their tails?<br/>
            And if no headache persecute them,<br/>
            So long the host may credit give,<br/>
            They merrily and careless live.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            The fact is easy to unravel,<br/>
            Their air's so odd, they've just returned from travel:<br/>
            A single hour they've not been here.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            You've verily hit the truth! Leipzig to me is dear:<br/>
            Paris in miniature, how it refines its people!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Who are the strangers, should you guess?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Let me alone! I'll set them first to drinking,<br/>
            And then, as one a child's tooth draws, with cleverness,<br/>
            I'll worm their secret out, I'm thinking.<br/>
            They're of a noble house, that's very clear:<br/>
            Haughty and discontented they appear.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            They're mountebanks, upon a revel.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Perhaps.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Look out, I'll smoke them now!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            Not if he had them by the neck, I vow,<br/>
            Would e'er these people scent the Devil!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly"> Fair greeting, gentlemen!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Our thanks: we give the same.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            (Murmurs, inspecting MEPHISTOPHELES from the side.)
            In one foot is the fellow lame?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Is it permitted that we share your leisure?<br/>
            In place of cheering drink, which one seeks vainly here,<br/>
            Your company shall give us pleasure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            A most fastidious person you appear.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            No doubt 'twas late when you from Rippach started?<br/>
            And supping there with Hans occasioned your delay?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            We passed, without a call, to-day.<br/>
            At our last interview, before we parted<br/>
            Much of his cousins did he speak, entreating<br/>
            That we should give to each his kindly greeting.<br/>
               </p>
        (He bows to FROSCH.)

    
    <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
        (aside)
        <p>
            You have it now! he understands.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            A knave sharp-set!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Just wait awhile: I'll have him yet.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            If I am right, we heard the sound<br/>
            Of well-trained voices, singing chorus;<br/>
            And truly, song must here rebound<br/>
            Superbly from the arches o'er us.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Are you, perhaps, a virtuoso?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            O no! my wish is great, my power is only so-so.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Give us a song!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            If you desire, a number.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            So that it be a bran-new strain!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            We've just retraced our way from. Spain,<br/>
            The lovely land of wine, and song, and slumber.<br/>
               </p>
        (Sings.)
        <p>
            There was a king once reigning,<br/>
            Who had a big black flea—<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Hear, hear! A flea! D'ye rightly take the jest?<br/>
            I call a flea a tidy guest.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (sings)
        <p>
            There was a king once reigning,<br/>
            Who had a big black flea,<br/>
            And loved him past explaining,<br/>
            As his own son were he.<br/>
            He called his man of stitches;<br/>
            The tailor came straightway:<br/>
            Here, measure the lad for breeches.<br/>
            And measure his coat, I say!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            But mind, allow the tailor no caprices:<br/>
            Enjoin upon him, as his head is dear,<br/>
            To most exactly measure, sew and shear,<br/>
            So that the breeches have no creases!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            In silk and velvet gleaming<br/>
            He now was wholly drest—<br/>
            Had a coat with ribbons streaming,<br/>
            A cross upon his breast.<br/>
            He had the first of stations,<br/>
            A minister's star and name;<br/>
            And also all his relations<br/>
            Great lords at court became.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            And the lords and ladies of honor<br/>
            Were plagued, awake and in bed;<br/>
            The queen she got them upon her,<br/>
            The maids were bitten and bled.<br/>
            And they did not dare to brush them,<br/>
            Or scratch them, day or night:<br/>
            We crack them and we crush them,<br/>
            At once, whene'er they bite.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS</b>
        (shouting)
        <p>
            We crack them and we crush them,<br/>
            At once, whene'er they bite!<br/>
            FROSCH Bravo! bravo! that was fine.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Every flea may it so befall!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Point your fingers and nip them all!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Hurrah for Freedom! Hurrah for wine!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I fain would drink with you, my glass to Freedom clinking,<br/>
            If 'twere a better wine that here I see you drinking.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Don't let us hear that speech again!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Did I not fear the landlord might complain,<br/>
            I'd treat these worthy guests, with pleasure,<br/>
            To some from out our cellar's treasure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Just treat, and let the landlord me arraign!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            And if the wine be good, our praises shall be ample.<br/>
            But do not give too very small a sample;<br/>
            For, if its quality I decide,<br/>
            With a good mouthful I must be supplied.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
        (aside)
        <p>
            They're from the Rhine! I guessed as much, before.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Bring me a gimlet here!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            What shall therewith be done?<br/>
            You've not the casks already at the door?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Yonder, within the landlord's box of tools, there's one!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (takes the gimlet)
        (To FROSCH.)
        <p>
            Now, give me of your taste some intimation.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            How do you mean? Have you so many kinds?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The choice is free: make up your minds.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
        (to FROSCH)
        <p>
            Aha! you lick your chops, from sheer anticipation.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Good! if I have the choice, so let the wine be Rhenish!<br/>
            Our Fatherland can best the sparkling cup replenish.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (boring a hole in the edge of the table, at the place where FROSCH sits)
        <p>
            Get me a little wax, to make the stoppers, quick!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Ah! I perceive a juggler's trick.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to BRANDER)
        <p>
            And you?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Champagne shall be my wine,<br/>
            And let it sparkle fresh and fine!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (bores: in the meantime one has made the wax stoppers, and plugged the holes with
            them.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            What's foreign one can't always keep quite clear of,<br/>
            For good things, oft, are not so near;<br/>
            A German can't endure the French to see or hear of,<br/>
            Yet drinks their wines with hearty cheer.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            (as MEPHISTOPHELES approaches his seat)
            For me, I grant, sour wine is out of place;<br/>
            Fill up my glass with sweetest, will you?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (boring)
        <p>
            Tokay shall flow at once, to fill you!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            No—look me, Sirs, straight in the face!<br/>
            I see you have your fun at our expense.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            O no! with gentlemen of such pretence,<br/>
            That were to venture far, indeed.<br/>
            Speak out, and make your choice with speed! With what a vintage can I serve you?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            With any—only satisfy our need.<br/>
            (After the holes have been bored and plugged)
        </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (with singular gestures)
        <p>
            Grapes the vine-stem bears,<br/>
            Horns the he-goat wears!<br/>
            The grapes are juicy, the vines are wood,<br/>
            The wooden table gives wine as good!<br/>
            Into the depths of Nature peer,—<br/>
            Only believe there's a miracle here!<br/>
            Now draw the stoppers, and drink your fill!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALL</b>
        (as they draw out the stoppers, and the wine which has been desired flows into the
            glass of each)
        <p>
            O beautiful fountain, that flows at will!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            But have a care that you nothing spill!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (They drink repeatedly.)
    <br/>
               <b>ALL</b>
        (sing)
        <p>
            As 'twere five hundred hogs, we feel<br/>
            So cannibalic jolly!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            See, now, the race is happy—it is free!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">To leave them is my inclination.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Take notice, first! their bestiality<br/>
            Will make a brilliant demonstration.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
        (drinks carelessly: the wine spills upon the earth, and turns to flame)
        <p>
            Help! Fire! Help! Hell-fire is sent!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (charming away the flame)
        <p>
            Be quiet, friendly element!<br/>
               </p>
        (To the revellers)
        <p>
            A bit of purgatory 'twas for this time, merely.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            What mean you? Wait!—you'll pay for't dearly!<br/>
            You'll know us, to your detriment.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Don't try that game a second time upon us!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            I think we'd better send him packing quietly.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            What, Sir! you dare to make so free,<br/>
            And play your hocus-pocus on us!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Be still, old wine-tub.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Broomstick, you!<br/>
            You face it out, impertinent and heady?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Just wait! a shower of blows is ready.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            (draws a stopper out of the table: fire flies in his face.)
            I burn! I burn!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            'Tis magic! Strike—<br/>
            The knave is outlawed! Cut him as you like!<br/>
            (They draw their knives, and rush upon MEPHISTOPHELES.)
        </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (with solemn gestures)
        <p>
            False word and form of air,<br/>
            Change place, and sense ensnare!<br/>
            Be here—and there!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (They stand amazed and look at each other.)
    <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Where am I? What a lovely land!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Vines? Can I trust my eyes?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            And purple grapes at hand!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            Here, over this green arbor bending,<br/>
            See what a vine! what grapes depending!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (He takes SIEBEL by the nose: the others do the same reciprocally, and raise their
        knives.)
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (as above)
        <p>
            Loose, Error, from their eyes the band,<br/>
            And how the Devil jests, be now enlightened!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (He disappears with FAUST: the revellers start and separate.)
    <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            What happened?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            How?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            Was that your nose I tightened?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
        (to SIEBEL)
        <p>
            And yours that still I have in hand?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            It was a blow that went through every limb!<br/>
            Give me a chair! I sink! my senses swim.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            But what has happened, tell me now?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            Where is he? If I catch the scoundrel hiding,<br/>
            He shall not leave alive, I vow.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            I saw him with these eyes upon a wine-cask riding<br/>
            Out of the cellar-door, just now.<br/>
            Still in my feet the fright like lead is weighing.<br/>
            (He turns towards the table.)
        </p>
               <p>
            Why! If the fount of wine should still be playing?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SIEBEL</b>
               <p>
            'Twas all deceit, and lying, false design!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FROSCH</b>
               <p>
            And yet it seemed as I were drinking wine.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BRANDER</b>
               <p>
            But with the grapes how was it, pray?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALTMAYER</b>
               <p>
            Shall one believe no miracles, just say!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
