<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene III</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>III. THE STUDY (The Exorcism)</h1>
               <hr/>
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (Entering, with the poodle.)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Behind me, field and meadow sleeping,<br/>
                I leave in deep, prophetic night,<br/>
                Within whose dread and holy keeping<br/>
                The better soul awakes to light.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The wild desires no longer win us,<br/>
                The deeds of passion cease to chain;<br/>
                The love of Man revives within us,<br/>
                The love of God revives again.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Be still, thou poodle; make not such racket and riot!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Why at the threshold wilt snuffing be?<br/>
                Behind the stove repose thee in quiet!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">My softest cushion I give to thee.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">As thou, up yonder, with running and leaping<br/>
                Amused us hast, on the mountain's crest,<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">So now I take thee into my keeping,<br/>
                A welcome, but also a silent, guest.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Ah, when, within our narrow chamber<br/>
                The lamp with friendly lustre glows,<br/>
                Flames in the breast each faded ember,<br/>
                And in the heart, itself that knows.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Then Hope again lends sweet assistance,<br/>
                And Reason then resumes her speech:<br/>
                One yearns, the rivers of existence,<br/>
                The very founts of Life, to reach.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Snarl not, poodle! To the sound that rises,<br/>
                The sacred tones that my soul embrace,<br/>
                This bestial noise is out of place.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">We are used to see, that Man despises<br/>
                What he never comprehends,<br/>
                And the Good and the Beautiful vilipends,<br/>
                Finding them often hard to measure:<br/>
                Will the dog, like man, snarl his displeasure?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">But ah! I feel, though will thereto be stronger,<br/>
                Contentment flows from out my breast no longer.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Why must the stream so soon run dry and fail us,<br/>
                And burning thirst again assail us?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Therein I've borne so much probation!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And yet, this want may be supplied us;<br/>
                We call the Supernatural to guide us;<br/>
                We pine and thirst for Revelation,<br/>
                Which nowhere worthier is, more nobly sent,<br/>
                Than here, in our New Testament.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I feel impelled, its meaning to determine,—<br/>
                With honest purpose, once for all,<br/>
                The hallowed Original<br/>
                To change to my beloved German.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He opens a volume, and commences.)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">'Tis written: "In the Beginning was the Word."<br/>
                Here am I balked: who, now can help afford?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The Word?—impossible so high to rate it;<br/>
                And otherwise must I translate it.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">If by the Spirit I am truly taught.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Then thus: "In the Beginning was the Thought"<br/>
                This first line let me weigh completely,<br/>
                Lest my impatient pen proceed too fleetly.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Is it the Thought which works, creates, indeed?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">"In the Beginning was the Power," I read.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yet, as I write, a warning is suggested,<br/>
                That I the sense may not have fairly tested.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The Spirit aids me: now I see the light!<br/>
                "In the Beginning was the Act," I write.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">If I must share my chamber with thee,<br/>
                Poodle, stop that howling, prithee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cease to bark and bellow!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Such a noisy, disturbing fellow<br/>
                I'll no longer suffer near me.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">One of us, dost hear me!<br/>
                Must leave, I fear me.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">No longer guest-right I bestow;<br/>
                The door is open, art free to go.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">But what do I see in the creature?<br/>
                Is that in the course of nature?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Is't actual fact? or Fancy's shows?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">How long and broad my poodle grows!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">He rises mightily:<br/>
                A canine form that cannot be!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">What a spectre I've harbored thus!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">He resembles a hippopotamus,<br/>
                With fiery eyes, teeth terrible to see:<br/>
                O, now am I sure of thee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">For all of thy half-hellish brood<br/>
                The Key of Solomon is good.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRITS</b>
        (in the corridor)
        <p>
            Some one, within, is caught!<br/>
            Stay without, follow him not!<br/>
            Like the fox in a snare,<br/>
            Quakes the old hell-lynx there.<br/>
            Take heed—look about!<br/>
            Back and forth hover,<br/>
            Under and over,<br/>
            And he'll work himself out.<br/>
            If your aid avail him,<br/>
            Let it not fail him;<br/>
            For he, without measure,<br/>
            Has wrought for our pleasure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">First, to encounter the beast,<br/>
                The Words of the Four be addressed:<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Salamander, shine glorious!<br/>
                Wave, Undine, as bidden!<br/>
                Sylph, be thou hidden!<br/>
                Gnome, be laborious!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Who knows not their sense<br/>
                (These elements),— Their properties<br/>
                And power not sees,—<br/>
                No mastery he inherits<br/>
                Over the Spirits.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Vanish in flaming ether,<br/>
                Salamander!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Flow foamingly together,<br/>
                Undine!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Shine in meteor-sheen,<br/>
                Sylph!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Bring help to hearth and shelf.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Incubus! Incubus!<br/>
                Step forward, and finish thus!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Of the Four, no feature<br/>
                Lurks in the creature.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Quiet he lies, and grins disdain:<br/>
                Not yet, it seems, have I given him pain.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Now, to undisguise thee,<br/>
                Hear me exorcise thee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Art thou, my gay one,<br/>
                Hell's fugitive stray-one?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The sign witness now,<br/>
                Before which they bow,<br/>
                The cohorts of Hell!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">With hair all bristling, it begins to swell.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Base Being, hearest thou?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Knowest and fearest thou<br/>
                The One, unoriginate,<br/>
                Named inexpressibly,<br/>
                Through all Heaven impermeate,<br/>
                Pierced irredressibly!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Behind the stove still banned,<br/>
                See it, an elephant, expand!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">It fills the space entire,<br/>
                Mist-like melting, ever faster.<br/> 'Tis enough: ascend no higher,— Lay
                    thyself at the feet of the Master!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Thou seest, not vain the threats I bring thee:<br/>
                With holy fire I'll scorch and sting thee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Wait not to know<br/>
                The threefold dazzling glow!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Wait not to know<br/>
                The strongest art within my hands!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            (while the vapor is dissipating, steps forth from behind the stove, in the
                costume of a Travelling Scholar.)
            Why such a noise? What are my lord's commands?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">This was the poodle's real core,<br/>
                A travelling scholar, then? The casus is diverting.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The learned gentleman I bow before:<br/>
            You've made me roundly sweat, that's certain!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">What is thy name?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            A question small, it seems,<br/>
            For one whose mind the Word so much despises;<br/>
            Who, scorning all external gleams,<br/>
            The depths of being only prizes.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">With all you gentlemen, the name's a test,<br/>
                Whereby the nature usually is expressed.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Clearly the latter it implies<br/>
                In names like Beelzebub, Destroyer, Father of Lies.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Who art thou, then?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Part of that Power, not understood,<br/>
            Which always wills the Bad, and always works the Good.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">What hidden sense in this enigma lies?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I am the Spirit that Denies!<br/>
            And justly so: for all things, from the Void<br/>
            Called forth, deserve to be destroyed:<br/>
            'Twere better, then, were naught created.<br/>
            Thus, all which you as Sin have rated,—<br/>
            Destruction,—aught with Evil blent,—<br/>
            That is my proper element.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thou nam'st thyself a part, yet show'st complete to me?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The modest truth I speak to thee.<br/>
            If Man, that microcosmic fool, can see<br/>
            Himself a whole so frequently,<br/>
            Part of the Part am I, once All, in primal Night,—<br/>
            Part of the Darkness which brought forth the Light,<br/>
            The haughty Light, which now disputes the space,<br/>
            And claims of Mother Night her ancient place.<br/>
            And yet, the struggle fails; since Light, howe'er it weaves,<br/>
            Still, fettered, unto bodies cleaves:<br/>
            It flows from bodies, bodies beautifies;<br/>
            By bodies is its course impeded;<br/>
            And so, but little time is needed,<br/>
            I hope, ere, as the bodies die, it dies!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">I see the plan thou art pursuing:<br/>
                Thou canst not compass general ruin,<br/>
                And hast on smaller scale begun.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And truly 'tis not much, when all is done.<br/>
            That which to Naught is in resistance set,—<br/>
            The Something of this clumsy world,—has yet,<br/>
            With all that I have undertaken,<br/>
            Not been by me disturbed or shaken:<br/>
            From earthquake, tempest, wave, volcano's brand,<br/>
            Back into quiet settle sea and land!<br/>
            And that damned stuff, the bestial, human brood,—<br/>
            What use, in having that to play with?<br/>
            How many have I made away with!<br/>
            And ever circulates a newer, fresher blood.<br/>
            It makes me furious, such things beholding:<br/>
            From Water, Earth, and Air unfolding,<br/>
            A thousand germs break forth and grow,<br/>
            In dry, and wet, and warm, and chilly;<br/>
            And had I not the Flame reserved, why, really,<br/>
            There's nothing special of my own to show!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">So, to the actively eternal<br/>
                Creative force, in cold disdain<br/>
                You now oppose the fist infernal,<br/>
                Whose wicked clench is all in vain!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Some other labor seek thou rather,<br/>
                Queer Son of Chaos, to begin!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Well, we'll consider: thou canst gather<br/>
            My views, when next I venture in.<br/>
            Might I, perhaps, depart at present?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Why thou shouldst ask, I don't perceive.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Though our acquaintance is so recent,<br/>
                For further visits thou hast leave.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The window's here, the door is yonder;<br/>
                A chimney, also, you behold.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I must confess that forth I may not wander,<br/>
            My steps by one slight obstacle controlled,—<br/>
            The wizard's-foot, that on your threshold made is.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">The pentagram prohibits thee?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Why, tell me now, thou Son of Hades,<br/>
                If that prevents, how cam'st thou in to me?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Could such a spirit be so cheated?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Inspect the thing: the drawing's not completed.<br/>
            The outer angle, you may see,<br/>
            Is open left—the lines don't fit it.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Well,—Chance, this time, has fairly hit it!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And thus, thou'rt prisoner to me?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">It seems the business has succeeded.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The poodle naught remarked, as after thee he speeded;<br/>
            But other aspects now obtain:<br/>
            The Devil can't get out again.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Try, then, the open window-pane!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            For Devils and for spectres this is law:<br/>
            Where they have entered in, there also they withdraw.<br/>
            The first is free to us; we're governed by the second.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">In Hell itself, then, laws are reckoned?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">That's well! So might a compact be<br/>
                Made with you gentlemen—and binding,—surely?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            All that is promised shall delight thee purely;<br/>
            No skinflint bargain shalt thou see.<br/>
            But this is not of swift conclusion;<br/>
            We'll talk about the matter soon.<br/>
            And now, I do entreat this boon—<br/>
            Leave to withdraw from my intrusion.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">One moment more I ask thee to remain,<br/>
                Some pleasant news, at least, to tell me.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Release me, now! I soon shall come again;<br/>
            Then thou, at will, mayst question and compel me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">I have not snares around thee cast;<br/>
                Thyself hast led thyself into the meshes.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Who traps the Devil, hold him fast!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Not soon a second time he'll catch a prey so precious.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            An't please thee, also I'm content to stay,<br/>
            And serve thee in a social station;<br/>
            But stipulating, that I may<br/>
            With arts of mine afford thee recreation.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Thereto I willingly agree,<br/>
                If the diversion pleasant be.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            My friend, thou'lt win, past all pretences,<br/>
            More in this hour to soothe thy senses,<br/>
            Than in the year's monotony.<br/>
            That which the dainty spirits sing thee,<br/>
            The lovely pictures they shall bring thee,<br/>
            Are more than magic's empty show.<br/>
            Thy scent will be to bliss invited;<br/>
            Thy palate then with taste delighted,<br/>
            Thy nerves of touch ecstatic glow!<br/>
            All unprepared, the charm I spin:<br/>
            We're here together, so begin!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRITS</b>
               <p>
            Vanish, ye darking<br/>
            Arches above him!<br/>
            Loveliest weather,<br/>
            Born of blue ether,<br/>
            Break from the sky!<br/>
            O that the darkling<br/>
            Clouds had departed!<br/>
            Starlight is sparkling,<br/>
            Tranquiller-hearted<br/>
            Suns are on high.<br/>
            Heaven's own children<br/>
            In beauty bewildering,<br/>
            Waveringly bending,<br/>
            Pass as they hover;<br/>
            Longing unending<br/>
            Follows them over.<br/>
            They, with their glowing<br/>
            Garments, out-flowing,<br/>
            Cover, in going,<br/>
            Landscape and bower,<br/>
            Where, in seclusion,<br/>
            Lovers are plighted,<br/>
            Lost in illusion.<br/>
            Bower on bower!<br/>
            Tendrils unblighted!<br/>
            Lo! in a shower<br/>
            Grapes that o'ercluster<br/>
            Gush into must, or<br/>
            Flow into rivers<br/>
            Of foaming and flashing<br/>
            Wine, that is dashing<br/>
            Gems, as it boundeth<br/>
            Down the high places,<br/>
            And spreading, surroundeth<br/>
            With crystalline spaces,<br/>
            In happy embraces,<br/>
            Blossoming forelands,<br/>
            Emerald shore-lands!<br/>
            And the winged races<br/>
            Drink, and fly onward—<br/>
            Fly ever sunward<br/>
            To the enticing<br/>
            Islands, that flatter,<br/>
            Dipping and rising<br/>
            Light on the water!<br/>
            Hark, the inspiring<br/>
            Sound of their quiring!<br/>
            See, the entrancing<br/>
            Whirl of their dancing!<br/>
            All in the air are<br/>
            Freer and fairer.<br/>
            Some of them scaling<br/>
            Boldly the highlands,<br/>
            Others are sailing,<br/>
            Circling the islands;<br/>
            Others are flying;<br/>
            Life-ward all hieing,—<br/>
            All for the distant<br/>
            Star of existent<br/>
            Rapture and Love!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            He sleeps! Enough, ye fays! your airy number<br/>
            Have sung him truly into slumber:<br/>
            For this performance I your debtor prove.—<br/>
            Not yet art thou the man, to catch the Fiend and hold him!—<br/>
            With fairest images of dreams infold him,<br/>
            Plunge him in seas of sweet untruth!<br/>
            Yet, for the threshold's magic which controlled him,<br/>
            The Devil needs a rat's quick tooth.<br/>
            I use no lengthened invocation:<br/>
            Here rustles one that soon will work my liberation.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            The lord of rats and eke of mice,<br/>
            Of flies and bed-bugs, frogs and lice,<br/>
            Summons thee hither to the door-sill,<br/>
            To gnaw it where, with just a morsel<br/>
            Of oil, he paints the spot for thee:—<br/>
            There com'st thou, hopping on to me!<br/>
            To work, at once! The point which made me craven<br/>
            Is forward, on the ledge, engraven.<br/>
            Another bite makes free the door:<br/>
            So, dream thy dreams, O Faust, until we meet once more!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (awaking)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Am I again so foully cheated?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Remains there naught of lofty spirit-sway,<br/>
                But that a dream the Devil counterfeited,<br/>
                And that a poodle ran away?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
