<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XXI</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>XXI. WALPURGIS-NIGHT</h1>
               <hr/>
    THE HARTZ MOUNTAINS.
    District of Schierke and Elend.
    FAUST MEPHISTOPHELES
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            DOST thou not wish a broomstick-steed's assistance?<br/>
            The sturdiest he-goat I would gladly see:<br/>
            The way we take, our goal is yet some distance.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">So long as in my legs I feel the fresh existence.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">This knotted staff suffices me.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">What need to shorten so the way?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Along this labyrinth of vales to wander,<br/>
            Then climb the rocky ramparts yonder,<br/>
            Wherefrom the fountain flings eternal spray,<br/>
            Is such delight, my steps would fain delay.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The spring-time stirs within the fragrant birches,<br/>
            And even the fir-tree feels it now:<br/>
            Should then our limbs escape its gentle searches?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I notice no such thing, I vow!<br/>
            'Tis winter still within my body:<br/>
            Upon my path I wish for frost and snow.<br/>
            How sadly rises, incomplete and ruddy,<br/>
            The moon's lone disk, with its belated glow,<br/>
            And lights so dimly, that, as one advances,<br/>
            At every step one strikes a rock or tree!<br/>
            Let us, then, use a Jack-o'-lantern's glances:<br/>
            I see one yonder, burning merrily.<br/>
            Ho, there! my friend! I'll levy thine attendance:<br/>
            Why waste so vainly thy resplendence?<br/>
            Be kind enough to light us up the steep!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WILL-O'-THE-WISP</b>
               <p>
            My reverence, I hope, will me enable<br/>
            To curb my temperament unstable;<br/>
            For zigzag courses we are wont to keep.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Indeed? he'd like mankind to imitate!<br/>
            Now, in the Devil's name, go straight,<br/>
            Or I'll blow out his being's flickering spark!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WILL-O'-THE-WISP</b>
               <p>
            You are the master of the house, I mark,<br/>
            And I shall try to serve you nicely.<br/>
            But then, reflect: the mountain's magic-mad to-day,<br/>
            And if a will-o'-the-wisp must guide you on the way,<br/>
            You mustn't take things too precisely.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST, MEPHISTOPHELES, WILL-O'-THE-WISP</b>
        (in alternating song)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">We, it seems, have entered newly<br/>
            In the sphere of dreams enchanted.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Do thy bidding, guide us truly,<br/>
            That our feet be forwards planted<br/>
            In the vast, the desert spaces!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">See them swiftly changing places,<br/>
            Trees on trees beside us trooping,<br/>
            And the crags above us stooping,<br/>
            And the rocky snouts, outgrowing,—<br/>
            Hear them snoring, hear them blowing!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">O'er the stones, the grasses, flowing<br/>
            Stream and streamlet seek the hollow.<br/>
            Hear I noises? songs that follow?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Hear I tender love-petitions?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine"> Voices of those heavenly visions?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Sounds of hope, of love undying!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And the echoes, like traditions<br/>
            Of old days, come faint and hollow.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Hoo-hoo! Shoo-hoo! Nearer hover<br/>
            Jay and screech-owl, and the plover,—<br/>
            Are they all awake and crying?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Is't the salamander pushes,<br/>
            Bloated-bellied, through the bushes?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And the roots, like serpents twisted,<br/>
            Through the sand and boulders toiling,<br/>
            Fright us, weirdest links uncoiling<br/>
            To entrap us, unresisted:<br/>
            Living knots and gnarls uncanny<br/>
            Feel with polypus-antennae<br/>
            For the wanderer. Mice are flying,<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thousand-colored, herd-wise hieing<br/>
            Through the moss and through the heather!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">And the fire-flies wink and darkle,<br/>
            Crowded swarms that soar and sparkle,<br/>
            And in wildering escort gather!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Tell me, if we still are standing,<br/>
            Or if further we're ascending?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">All is turning, whirling, blending,<br/>
            Trees and rocks with grinning faces,<br/>
            Wandering lights that spin in mazes,<br/>
            Still increasing and expanding!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Grasp my skirt with heart undaunted!<br/>
            Here a middle-peak is planted,<br/>
            Whence one seeth, with amaze,<br/>
            Mammon in the mountain blaze.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">How strangely glimmers through the hollows<br/>
            A dreary light, like that of dawn!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Its exhalation tracks and follows<br/>
            The deepest gorges, faint and wan.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly"> Here steam, there rolling vapor sweepeth;<br/>
            Here burns the glow through film and haze:<br/>
            Now like a tender thread it creepeth,<br/>
            Now like a fountain leaps and plays.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Here winds away, and in a hundred<br/>
            Divided veins the valley braids:<br/>
            There, in a corner pressed and sundered,<br/>
            Itself detaches, spreads and fades.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Here gush the sparkles incandescent<br/>
            Like scattered showers of golden sand;—<br/>
            But, see! in all their height, at present,<br/>
            The rocky ramparts blazing stand.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Has not Sir Mammon grandly lighted<br/>
            His palace for this festal night?<br/>
            'Tis lucky thou hast seen the sight;<br/>
            The boisterous guests approach that were invited.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">How raves the tempest through the air!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">With what fierce blows upon my neck 'tis beating!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Under the old ribs of the rock retreating,<br/>
            Hold fast, lest thou be hurled down the abysses there!<br/>
            The night with the mist is black;<br/>
            Hark! how the forests grind and crack!<br/>
            Frightened, the owlets are scattered:<br/>
            Hearken! the pillars are shattered.<br/>
            The evergreen palaces shaking!<br/>
            Boughs are groaning and breaking,<br/>
            The tree-trunks terribly thunder,<br/>
            The roots are twisting asunder!<br/>
            In frightfully intricate crashing<br/>
            Each on the other is dashing,<br/>
            And over the wreck-strewn gorges<br/>
            The tempest whistles and surges!<br/>
            Hear'st thou voices higher ringing?<br/>
            Far away, or nearer singing?<br/>
            Yes, the mountain's side along,<br/>
            Sweeps an infuriate glamouring song!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WITCHES</b>
        (in chorus)
        <p>
            The witches ride to the Brocken's top,<br/>
            The stubble is yellow, and green the crop.<br/>
            There gathers the crowd for carnival:<br/>
            Sir Urian sits over all.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            And so they go over stone and stock;<br/>
            The witch she——-s, and——-s the buck.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A VOICE</b>
               <p>
            Alone, old Baubo's coming now;<br/>
            She rides upon a farrow-sow.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS</b>
               <p>
            Then honor to whom the honor is due!<br/>
            Dame Baubo first, to lead the crew!<br/>
            A tough old sow and the mother thereon,<br/>
            Then follow the witches, every one.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A VOICE</b>
               <p>
            Which way com'st thou hither?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
               <p>
            O'er the Ilsen-stone.<br/>
            I peeped at the owl in her nest alone:<br/>
            How she stared and glared!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
               <p>
            Betake thee to Hell!<br/>
            Why so fast and so fell?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
               <p>
            She has scored and has flayed me:<br/>
            See the wounds she has made me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WITCHES</b>
        (chorus)
        <p>
            The way is wide, the way is long:<br/>
            See, what a wild and crazy throng!<br/>
            The broom it scratches, the fork it thrusts,<br/>
            The child is stifled, the mother bursts.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WIZARDS</b>
        (semichorus)
        <p>
            As doth the snail in shell, we crawl:<br/>
            Before us go the women all.<br/>
            When towards the Devil's House we tread,<br/>
            Woman's a thousand steps ahead.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>OTHER SEMICHORUS</b>
               <p>
            We do not measure with such care:<br/>
            Woman in thousand steps is theft.<br/>
            But howsoe'er she hasten may,<br/>
            Man in one leap has cleared the way.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (from above)
        <p>
            Come on, come on, from Rocky Lake!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (from below)
        <p>
            Aloft we'd fain ourselves betake.<br/>
            We've washed, and are bright as ever you will,<br/>
            Yet we're eternally sterile still.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BOTH CHORUSES</b>
               <p>
            The wind is hushed, the star shoots by.<br/>
            The dreary moon forsakes the sky;<br/>
            The magic notes, like spark on spark,<br/>
            Drizzle, whistling through the dark.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (from below)
        <p>
            Halt, there! Ho, there!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (from above)
        <p>
            Who calls from the rocky cleft below there?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (below)
        <p>
            Take me, too! take me, too!<br/>
            I'm climbing now three hundred years,<br/>
            And yet the summit cannot see:<br/>
            Among my equals I would be.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BOTH CHORUSES</b>
               <p>
            Bears the broom and bears the stock,<br/>
            Bears the fork and bears the buck:<br/>
            Who cannot raise himself to-night<br/>
            Is evermore a ruined wight.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>HALF-WITCH</b>
        (below)
        <p>
            So long I stumble, ill bestead,<br/>
            And the others are now so far ahead!<br/>
            At home I've neither rest nor cheer,<br/>
            And yet I cannot gain them here.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS OF WITCHES</b>
               <p>
            To cheer the witch will salve avail;<br/>
            A rag will answer for a sail;<br/>
            Each trough a goodly ship supplies;<br/>
            He ne'er will fly, who now not flies.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BOTH CHORUSES</b>
               <p>
            When round the summit whirls our flight,<br/>
            Then lower, and on the ground alight;<br/>
            And far and wide the heather press<br/>
            With witchhood's swarms of wantonness!<br/>
            (They settle down.)
        </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            They crowd and push, they roar and clatter!<br/>
            They whirl and whistle, pull and chatter!<br/>
            They shine, and spirt, and stink, and burn!<br/>
            The true witch-element we learn.<br/>
            Keep close! or we are parted, in our turn,<br/>
            Where art thou?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (in the distance)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Here!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            What! whirled so far astray?<br/>
            Then house-right I must use, and clear the way.<br/>
            Make room! Squire Voland comes! Room, gentle rabble,<br/>
            room!<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            Here, Doctor, hold to me: in one jump we'll resume<br/>
            An easier space, and from the crowd be free:<br/>
            It's too much, even for the like of me.<br/>
            Yonder, with special light, there's something shining clearer<br/>
            Within those bushes; I've a mind to see.<br/>
            Come on! we'll slip a little nearer.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Spirit of Contradiction! On! I'll follow straight.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">'Tis planned most wisely, if I judge aright:<br/>
            We climb the Brocken's top in the Walpurgis-Night,<br/>
            That arbitrarily, here, ourselves we isolate.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            But see, what motley flames among the heather!<br/>
            There is a lively club together:<br/>
            In smaller circles one is not alone.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Better the summit, I must own:<br/>
            There fire and whirling smoke I see.<br/>
            They seek the Evil One in wild confusion:<br/>
            Many enigmas there might find solution.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            But there enigmas also knotted be.<br/>
            Leave to the multitude their riot!<br/>
            Here will we house ourselves in quiet.<br/>
            It is an old, transmitted trade,<br/>
            That in the greater world the little worlds are made.<br/>
            I see stark-nude young witches congregate,<br/>
            And old ones, veiled and hidden shrewdly:<br/>
            On my account be kind, nor treat them rudely!<br/>
            The trouble's small, the fun is great.<br/>
            I hear the noise of instruments attuning,—<br/>
            Vile din! yet one must learn to bear the crooning.<br/>
            Come, come along! It must be, I declare!<br/>
            I'll go ahead and introduce thee there,<br/>
            Thine obligation newly earning.<br/>
            That is no little space: what say'st thou, friend?<br/>
            Look yonder! thou canst scarcely see the end:<br/>
            A hundred fires along the ranks are burning.<br/>
            They dance, they chat, they cook, they drink, they court:<br/>
            Now where, just tell me, is there better sport?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Wilt thou, to introduce us to the revel,<br/>
            Assume the part of wizard or of devil?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I'm mostly used, 'tis true, to go incognito,<br/>
            But on a gala-day one may his orders show.<br/>
            The Garter does not deck my suit,<br/>
            But honored and at home is here the cloven foot.<br/>
            Perceiv'st thou yonder snail? It cometh, slow and steady;<br/>
            So delicately its feelers pry,<br/>
            That it hath scented me already:<br/>
            I cannot here disguise me, if I try.<br/>
            But come! we'll go from this fire to a newer:<br/>
            I am the go-between, and thou the wooer.<br/>
               </p>
        (To some, who are sitting around dying embers:)
        <p>
            Old gentlemen, why at the outskirts? Enter!<br/>
            I'd praise you if I found you snugly in the centre,<br/>
            With youth and revel round you like a zone:<br/>
            You each, at home, are quite enough alone.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>GENERAL</b>
               <p>
            Say, who would put his trust in nations,<br/>
            Howe'er for them one may have worked and planned?<br/>
            For with the people, as with women,<br/>
            Youth always has the upper hand.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MINISTER</b>
               <p>
            They're now too far from what is just and sage.<br/>
            I praise the old ones, not unduly:<br/>
            When we were all-in-all, then, truly,<br/>
            Then was the real golden age.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PARVENU</b>
               <p>
            We also were not stupid, either,<br/>
            And what we should not, often did;<br/>
            But now all things have from their bases slid,<br/>
            Just as we meant to hold them fast together.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>AUTHOR</b>
               <p>
            Who, now, a work of moderate sense will read?<br/>
            Such works are held as antiquate and mossy;<br/>
            And as regards the younger folk, indeed,<br/>
            They never yet have been so pert and saucy.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (who all at once appears very old)
        <p>
            I feel that men are ripe for Judgment-Day,<br/>
            Now for the last time I've the witches'-hill ascended:<br/>
            Since to the lees my cask is drained away,<br/>
            The world's, as well, must soon be ended.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>HUCKSTER-WITCH</b>
               <p>
            Ye gentlemen, don't pass me thus!<br/>
            Let not the chance neglected be!<br/>
            Behold my wares attentively:<br/>
            The stock is rare and various.<br/>
            And yet, there's nothing I've collected—<br/>
            No shop, on earth, like this you'll find!—<br/>
            Which has not, once, sore hurt inflicted<br/>
            Upon the world, and on mankind.<br/>
            No dagger's here, that set not blood to flowing;<br/>
            No cup, that hath not once, within a healthy frame<br/>
            Poured speedy death, in poison glowing:<br/>
            No gems, that have not brought a maid to shame;<br/>
            No sword, but severed ties for the unwary,<br/>
            Or from behind struck down the adversary.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Gossip! the times thou badly comprehendest:<br/>
            What's done has happed—what haps, is done!<br/>
            'Twere better if for novelties thou sendest:<br/>
            By such alone can we be won.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Let me not lose myself in all this pother!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">This is a fair, as never was another!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The whirlpool swirls to get above:<br/>
            Thou'rt shoved thyself, imagining to shove.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">But who is that?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Note her especially,<br/>
            Tis Lilith.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Who?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Adam's first wife is she.<br/>
            Beware the lure within her lovely tresses,<br/>
            The splendid sole adornment of her hair!<br/>
            When she succeeds therewith a youth to snare,<br/>
            Not soon again she frees him from her jesses.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Those two, the old one with the young one sitting,<br/>
            They've danced already more than fitting.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            No rest to-night for young or old!<br/>
            They start another dance: come now, let us take hold!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (dancing with the young witch)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">A lovely dream once came to me;<br/>
            I then beheld an apple-tree,<br/>
            And there two fairest apples shone:<br/>
            They lured me so, I climbed thereon.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE FAIR ONE</b>
               <p>
            Apples have been desired by you,<br/>
            Since first in Paradise they grew;<br/>
            And I am moved with joy, to know<br/>
            That such within my garden grow.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (dancing with the old one)
        <p>
            A dissolute dream once came to me:<br/>
            Therein I saw a cloven tree,<br/>
            Which had a————————;<br/>
            Yet,——as 'twas, I fancied it.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE OLD ONE</b>
               <p>
            I offer here my best salute<br/>
            Unto the knight with cloven foot!<br/>
            Let him a—————prepare,<br/>
            If him—————————does not scare.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PROKTOPHANTASMIST</b>
               <p>
            Accurséd folk! How dare you venture thus?<br/>
            Had you not, long since, demonstration<br/>
            That ghosts can't stand on ordinary foundation?<br/>
            And now you even dance, like one of us!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE FAIR ONE</b>
        (dancing)
        <p>
            Why does he come, then, to our ball?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (dancing)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">O, everywhere on him you fall!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">When others dance, he weighs the matter:<br/>
            If he can't every step bechatter,<br/>
            Then 'tis the same as were the step not made;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">But if you forwards go, his ire is most displayed.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">If you would whirl in regular gyration<br/>
            As he does in his dull old mill,<br/>
            He'd show, at any rate, good-will,—<br/>
            Especially if you heard and heeded his hortation.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PROKTOPHANTASMIST</b>
               <p>
            You still are here? Nay, 'tis a thing unheard!<br/>
            Vanish, at once! We've said the enlightening word.<br/>
            The pack of devils by no rules is daunted:<br/>
            We are so wise, and yet is Tegel haunted.<br/>
            To clear the folly out, how have I swept and stirred!<br/>
            Twill ne'er be clean: why, 'tis a thing unheard!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE FAIR ONE</b>
               <p>
            Then cease to bore us at our ball!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PROKTOPHANTASMIST</b>
               <p>
            I tell you, spirits, to your face,<br/>
            I give to spirit-despotism no place;<br/>
            My spirit cannot practise it at all.<br/>
               </p>
        (The dance continues)
        <p>
            Naught will succeed, I see, amid such revels;<br/>
            Yet something from a tour I always save,<br/>
            And hope, before my last step to the grave,<br/>
            To overcome the poets and the devils.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            He now will seat him in the nearest puddle;<br/>
            The solace this, whereof he's most assured:<br/>
            And when upon his rump the leeches hang and fuddle,<br/>
            He'll be of spirits and of Spirit cured.<br/>
               </p>
        (To FAUST, who has left the dance:)
        <p>
            Wherefore forsakest thou the lovely maiden,<br/>
            That in the dance so sweetly sang?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Ah! in the midst of it there sprang<br/>
            A red mouse from her mouth—sufficient reason.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            That's nothing! One must not so squeamish be;<br/>
            So the mouse was not gray, enough for thee.<br/>
            Who'd think of that in love's selected season?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Then saw I—.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            What?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Mephisto, seest thou there,<br/>
            Alone and far, a girl most pale and fair?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">She falters on, her way scarce knowing,<br/>
            As if with fettered feet that stay her going.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I must confess, it seems to me<br/>
            As if my kindly Margaret were she.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Let the thing be! All thence have evil drawn:<br/>
            It is a magic shape, a lifeless eidolon.<br/>
            Such to encounter is not good:<br/>
            Their blank, set stare benumbs the human blood,<br/>
            And one is almost turned to stone.<br/>
            Medusa's tale to thee is known.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Forsooth, the eyes they are of one whom, dying,<br/>
            No hand with loving pressure closed;<br/>
            That is the breast whereon I once was lying,—<br/>
            The body sweet, beside which I reposed!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Tis magic all, thou fool, seduced so easily!<br/>
            Unto each man his love she seems to be.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly"> The woe, the rapture, so ensnare me,<br/>
            That from her gaze I cannot tear me!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And, strange! around her fairest throat<br/>
            A single scarlet band is gleaming,<br/>
            No broader than a knife-blade seeming!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Quite right! The mark I also note.<br/>
            Her head beneath her arm she'll sometimes carry;<br/>
            Twas Perseus lopped it, her old adversary.<br/>
            Thou crav'st the same illusion still!<br/>
            Come, let us mount this little hill;<br/>
            The Prater shows no livelier stir,<br/>
            And, if they've not bewitched my sense,<br/>
            I verily see a theatre.<br/>
            What's going on?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SERVIBILIS</b>
               <p>
            'Twill shortly recommence:<br/>
            A new performance—'tis the last of seven.<br/>
            To give that number is the custom here:<br/>
            'Twas by a Dilettante written,<br/>
            And Dilettanti in the parts appear.<br/>
            That now I vanish, pardon, I entreat you!<br/>
            As Dilettante I the curtain raise.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            When I upon the Blocksberg meet you,<br/>
            I find it good: for that's your proper place.<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
