<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene IX</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>IX. PROMENADE</h1>
               <hr/>
    (FAUST, walking thoughtfully up and down. To him MEPHISTOPHELES.)
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>

               <p>By all love ever rejected! By hell-fire hot and unsparing!<br/>
        I wish I knew something worse, that I might use it for<br/>
        swearing!<br/>
               </p>

    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">What ails thee? What is't gripes thee, elf?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly"> A face like thine beheld I never.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>

               <p>I would myself unto the Devil deliver,<br/>
        If I were not a Devil myself!<br/>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thy head is out of order, sadly:<br/>
        It much becomes thee to be raving madly.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>

               <p>Just think, the pocket of a priest should get<br/>
        The trinkets left for Margaret!<br/>
        The mother saw them, and, instanter,<br/>
        A secret dread began to haunt her.<br/>
        Keen scent has she for tainted air;<br/>
        She snuffs within her book of prayer,<br/>
        And smells each article, to see<br/>
        If sacred or profane it be;<br/>
        So here she guessed, from every gem,<br/>
        That not much blessing came with them.<br/>
        "My child," she said, "ill-gotten good<br/>
        Ensnares the soul, consumes the blood.<br/>
        Before the Mother of God we'll lay it;<br/>
        With heavenly manna she'll repay it!"<br/>
        But Margaret thought, with sour grimace,<br/>
        "A gift-horse is not out of place,<br/>
        And, truly! godless cannot be<br/>
        The one who brought such things to me."<br/>
        A parson came, by the mother bidden:<br/>
        He saw, at once, where the game was hidden,<br/>
        And viewed it with a favor stealthy.<br/>
        He spake: "That is the proper view,—<br/>
        Who overcometh, winneth too.<br/>
        The Holy Church has a stomach healthy:<br/>
        Hath eaten many a land as forfeit,<br/>
        And never yet complained of surfeit:<br/>
        The Church alone, beyond all question,<br/>
        Has for ill-gotten goods the right digestion."<br/>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">A general practice is the same,<br/>
        Which Jew and King may also claim.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>

               <p>Then bagged the spangles, chains, and rings,<br/>
        As if but toadstools were the things,<br/>
        And thanked no less, and thanked no more<br/>
        Than if a sack of nuts he bore,—<br/>
        Promised them fullest heavenly pay,<br/>
        And deeply edified were they.<br/>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">And Margaret?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>

               <p>Sits unrestful still,<br/>
        And knows not what she should, or will;<br/>
        Thinks on the jewels, day and night,<br/>
        But more on him who gave her such delight.<br/>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="divine">The darling's sorrow gives me pain.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Get thou a set for her again!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">The first was not a great display.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>

               <p>O yes, the gentleman finds it all child's-play!<br/>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Fix and arrange it to my will;<br/>
        And on her neighbor try thy skill!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Don't be a Devil stiff as paste,<br/>
        But get fresh jewels to her taste!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>


    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>Yes, gracious Sir, in all obedience!<br/>
        [Exit FAUST]
        Such an enamored fool in air would blow<br/>
        Sun, moon, and all the starry legions,<br/>
        To give his sweetheart a diverting show.<br/>
               </p>
    
    [Exit]
</section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
