<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene IV</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>IV. THE STUDY (The Compact)</h1>
               <hr/>
    FAUST MEPHISTOPHELES
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">A knock? Come in! Again my quiet broken?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            'Tis I!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Come in!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Thrice must the words be spoken.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Come in, then!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Thus thou pleasest me.<br/>
            I hope we'll suit each other well;<br/>
            For now, thy vapors to dispel,<br/>
            I come, a squire of high degree,<br/>
            In scarlet coat, with golden trimming,<br/>
            A cloak in silken lustre swimming,<br/>
            A tall cock's-feather in my hat,<br/>
            A long, sharp sword for show or quarrel,—<br/>
            And I advise thee, brief and flat,<br/>
            To don the self-same gay apparel,<br/>
            That, from this den released, and free,<br/>
            Life be at last revealed to thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">This life of earth, whatever my attire,<br/>
                Would pain me in its wonted fashion.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Too old am I to play with passion;<br/>
                Too young, to be without desire.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">What from the world have I to gain?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thou shalt abstain—renounce—refrain!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Such is the everlasting song<br/>
                That in the ears of all men rings,—<br/>
                That unrelieved, our whole life long,<br/>
                Each hour, in passing, hoarsely sings.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">In very terror I at morn awake,<br/>
                Upon the verge of bitter weeping,<br/>
                To see the day of disappointment break,<br/>
                To no one hope of mine—not one—its promise keeping:—<br/>
                That even each joy's presentiment<br/>
                With wilful cavil would diminish,<br/>
                With grinning masks of life prevent<br/>
                My mind its fairest work to finish!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Then, too, when night descends, how anxiously<br/>
                Upon my couch of sleep I lay me:<br/>
                There, also, comes no rest to me,<br/>
                But some wild dream is sent to fray me.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The God that in my breast is owned<br/>
                Can deeply stir the inner sources;<br/>
                The God, above my powers enthroned,<br/>
                He cannot change external forces.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">So, by the burden of my days oppressed,<br/>
                Death is desired, and Life a thing unblest!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And yet is never Death a wholly welcome guest.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">O fortunate, for whom, when victory glances,<br/>
                The bloody laurels on the brow he bindeth!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Whom, after rapid, maddening dances,<br/>
                In clasping maiden-arms he findeth!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">O would that I, before that spirit-power,<br/>
                Ravished and rapt from life, had sunken!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And yet, by some one, in that nightly hour,<br/>
            A certain liquid was not drunken.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Eavesdropping, ha! thy pleasure seems to be.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Omniscient am I not; yet much is known to me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Though some familiar tone, retrieving<br/>
                My thoughts from torment, led me on,<br/>
                And sweet, clear echoes came, deceiving<br/>
                A faith bequeathed from Childhood's dawn,<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Yet now I curse whate'er entices<br/>
                And snares the soul with visions vain;<br/>
                With dazzling cheats and dear devices<br/>
                Confines it in this cave of pain!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed be, at once, the high ambition<br/>
                Wherewith the mind itself deludes!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed be the glare of apparition<br/>
                That on the finer sense intrudes!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed be the lying dream's impression<br/>
                Of name, and fame, and laurelled brow!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed, all that flatters as possession,<br/>
                As wife and child, as knave and plow!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed Mammon be, when he with treasures<br/>
                To restless action spurs our fate!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed when, for soft, indulgent leisures,<br/>
                He lays for us the pillows straight!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed be the vine's transcendent nectar,—<br/>
                The highest favor Love lets fall!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Cursed, also, Hope!—cursed Faith, the spectre!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And cursed be Patience most of all!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS OF SPIRITS</b>
        (invisible)
        <p>
            Woe! woe!<br/>
            Thou hast it destroyed,<br/>
            The beautiful world,<br/>
            With powerful fist:<br/>
            In ruin 'tis hurled,<br/>
            By the blow of a demigod shattered!<br/>
            The scattered<br/>
            Fragments into the Void we carry,<br/>
            Deploring!<br/>
            The beauty perished beyond restoring.<br/>
            Mightier!<br/>
            For the children of men,<br/>
            Brightlier!<br/>
            Build it again,<br/>
            In thine own bosom build it anew!<br/>
            Bid the new career<br/>
            Commence,<br/>
            With clearer sense,<br/>
            And the new songs of cheer<br/>
            Be sung thereto!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            These are the small dependants<br/>
            Who give me attendance.<br/>
            Hear them, to deeds and passion<br/>
            Counsel in shrewd old-fashion!<br/>
            Into the world of strife,<br/>
            Out of this lonely life<br/>
            That of senses and sap has betrayed thee,<br/>
            They would persuade thee.<br/>
            This nursing of the pain forego thee,<br/>
            That, like a vulture, feeds upon thy breast!<br/>
            The worst society thou find'st will show thee<br/>
            Thou art a man among the rest.<br/>
            But 'tis not meant to thrust<br/>
            Thee into the mob thou hatest!<br/>
            I am not one of the greatest,<br/>
            Yet, wilt thou to me entrust<br/>
            Thy steps through life, I'll guide thee,—<br/>
            Will willingly walk beside thee,—<br/>
            Will serve thee at once and forever<br/>
            With best endeavor,<br/>
            And, if thou art satisfied,<br/>
            Will as servant, slave, with thee abide.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">And what shall be my counter-service therefor?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The time is long: thou need'st not now insist.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">No—no! The Devil is an egotist,<br/>
                And is not apt, without a why or wherefore,<br/>
                "For God's sake," others to assist.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Speak thy conditions plain and clear!<br/>
                With such a servant danger comes, I fear.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Here, an unwearied slave, I'll wear thy tether,<br/>
            And to thine every nod obedient be:<br/>
            When There again we come together,<br/>
            Then shalt thou do the same for me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">The There my scruples naught increases.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">When thou hast dashed this world to pieces,<br/>
                The other, then, its place may fill.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Here, on this earth, my pleasures have their sources;<br/>
                Yon sun beholds my sorrows in his courses;<br/>
                And when from these my life itself divorces,<br/>
                Let happen all that can or will!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I'll hear no more: 'tis vain to ponder<br/>
                If there we cherish love or hate,<br/>
                Or, in the spheres we dream of yonder,<br/>
                A High and Low our souls await.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            In this sense, even, canst thou venture.<br/>
            Come, bind thyself by prompt indenture,<br/>
            And thou mine arts with joy shalt see:<br/>
            What no man ever saw, I'll give to thee.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Canst thou, poor Devil, give me whatsoever?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">When was a human soul, in its supreme endeavor,<br/>
                E'er understood by such as thou?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yet, hast thou food which never satiates, now,—<br/>
                The restless, ruddy gold hast thou,<br/>
                That runs, quicksilver-like, one's fingers through,—<br/>
                A game whose winnings no man ever knew,—<br/>
                A maid that, even from my breast,<br/>
                Beckons my neighbor with her wanton glances,<br/>
                And Honor's godlike zest,<br/>
                The meteor that a moment dances,—<br/>
                Show me the fruits that, ere they're gathered, rot,<br/>
                And trees that daily with new leafage clothe them!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Such a demand alarms me not:<br/>
            Such treasures have I, and can show them.<br/>
            But still the time may reach us, good my friend.<br/>
            When peace we crave and more luxurious diet.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">When on an idler's bed I stretch myself in quiet.<br/>
                There let, at once, my record end!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Canst thou with lying flattery rule me,<br/>
                Until, self-pleased, myself I see,—<br/>
                Canst thou with rich enjoyment fool me,<br/>
                Let that day be the last for me!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The bet I offer.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Done!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">And heartily!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">When thus I hail the Moment flying:<br/>
                "Ah, still delay—thou art so fair!"<br/>
                Then bind me in thy bonds undying,<br/>
                My final ruin then declare!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Then let the death-bell chime the token.<br/>
                Then art thou from thy service free!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The clock may stop, the hand be broken,<br/>
                Then Time be finished unto me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Consider well: my memory good is rated.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thou hast a perfect right thereto.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">My powers I have not rashly estimated:<br/>
                A slave am I, whate'er I do—<br/>
                If thine, or whose? 'tis needless to debate it.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Then at the Doctors'-banquet I, to-day,<br/>
            Will as a servant wait behind thee.<br/>
            But one thing more! Beyond all risk to bind thee,<br/>
            Give me a line or two, I pray.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Demand'st thou, Pedant, too, a document?<br/>
                Hast never known a man, nor proved his word's intent?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Is't not enough, that what I speak to-day<br/>
                Shall stand, with all my future days agreeing?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">In all its tides sweeps not the world away,<br/>
                And shall a promise bind my being?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Yet this delusion in our hearts we bear:<br/>
                Who would himself therefrom deliver?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Blest he, whose bosom Truth makes pure and fair!<br/>
                No sacrifice shall he repent of ever.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Nathless a parchment, writ and stamped with care,<br/>
                A spectre is, which all to shun endeavor.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">The word, alas! dies even in the pen,<br/>
                And wax and leather keep the lordship then.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">What wilt from me, Base Spirit, say?—<br/>
                Brass, marble, parchment, paper, clay?<br/>
                The terms with graver, quill, or chisel, stated?<br/>
                I freely leave the choice to thee.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Why heat thyself, thus instantly,<br/>
            With eloquence exaggerated?<br/>
            Each leaf for such a pact is good;<br/>
            And to subscribe thy name thou'lt take a drop of blood.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">If thou therewith art fully satisfied,<br/>
                So let us by the farce abide.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Blood is a juice of rarest quality.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Fear not that I this pact shall seek to sever?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The promise that I make to thee<br/>
                Is just the sum of my endeavor.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I have myself inflated all too high;<br/>
                My proper place is thy estate:<br/>
                The Mighty Spirit deigns me no reply,<br/>
                And Nature shuts on me her gate.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">The thread of Thought at last is broken,<br/>
                And knowledge brings disgust unspoken.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Let us the sensual deeps explore,<br/>
                To quench the fervors of glowing passion!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Let every marvel take form and fashion<br/>
                Through the impervious veil it wore!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Plunge we in Time's tumultuous dance,<br/>
                In the rush and roll of Circumstance!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Then may delight and distress,<br/>
                And worry and success,<br/>
                Alternately follow, as best they can:<br/>
                Restless activity proves the man!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            For you no bound, no term is set.<br/>
            Whether you everywhere be trying,<br/>
            Or snatch a rapid bliss in flying,<br/>
            May it agree with you, what you get!<br/>
            Only fall to, and show no timid balking.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">But thou hast heard, 'tis not of joy we're talking.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I take the wildering whirl, enjoyment's keenest pain,<br/>
                Enamored hate, exhilarant disdain.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">My bosom, of its thirst for knowledge sated,<br/>
                Shall not, henceforth, from any pang be wrested,<br/>
                And all of life for all mankind created<br/>
                Shall be within mine inmost being tested:<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The highest, lowest forms my soul shall borrow,<br/>
                Shall heap upon itself their bliss and sorrow,<br/>
                And thus, my own sole self to all their selves expanded,<br/>
                I too, at last, shall with them all be stranded!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Believe me, who for many a thousand year<br/>
            The same tough meat have chewed and tested,<br/>
            That from the cradle to the bier<br/>
            No man the ancient leaven has digested!<br/>
            Trust one of us, this Whole supernal<br/>
            Is made but for a God's delight!<br/>
            He dwells in splendor single and eternal,<br/>
            But us he thrusts in darkness, out of sight,<br/>
            And you he dowers with Day and Night.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Nay, but I will!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            A good reply!<br/>
            One only fear still needs repeating:<br/>
            The art is long, the time is fleeting.<br/>
            Then let thyself be taught, say I!<br/>
            Go, league thyself with a poet,<br/>
            Give the rein to his imagination,<br/>
            Then wear the crown, and show it,<br/>
            Of the qualities of his creation,—<br/>
            The courage of the lion's breed,<br/>
            The wild stag's speed,<br/>
            The Italian's fiery blood,<br/>
            The North's firm fortitude!<br/>
            Let him find for thee the secret tether<br/>
            That binds the Noble and Mean together.<br/>
            And teach thy pulses of youth and pleasure<br/>
            To love by rule, and hate by measure!<br/>
            I'd like, myself, such a one to see:<br/>
            Sir Microcosm his name should be.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">What am I, then, if 'tis denied my part<br/>
                The crown of all humanity to win me,<br/>
                Whereto yearns every sense within me?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Why, on the whole, thou'rt—what thou art.<br/>
            Set wigs of million curls upon thy head, to raise thee,<br/>
            Wear shoes an ell in height,—the truth betrays thee,<br/>
            And thou remainest—what thou art.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">I feel, indeed, that I have made the treasure<br/>
                Of human thought and knowledge mine, in vain;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And if I now sit down in restful leisure,<br/>
                No fount of newer strength is in my brain:<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I am no hair's-breadth more in height,<br/>
                Nor nearer, to the Infinite,<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Good Sir, you see the facts precisely<br/>
            As they are seen by each and all.<br/>
            We must arrange them now, more wisely,<br/>
            Before the joys of life shall pall.<br/>
            Why, Zounds! Both hands and feet are, truly—<br/>
            And head and virile forces—thine:<br/>
            Yet all that I indulge in newly,<br/>
            Is't thence less wholly mine?<br/>
            If I've six stallions in my stall,<br/>
            Are not their forces also lent me?<br/>
            I speed along, completest man of all,<br/>
            As though my legs were four-and-twenty.<br/>
            Take hold, then! let reflection rest,<br/>
            And plunge into the world with zest!<br/>
            I say to thee, a speculative wight<br/>
            Is like a beast on moorlands lean,<br/>
            That round and round some fiend misleads to evil plight,<br/>
            While all about lie pastures fresh and green.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Then how shall we begin?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            We'll try a wider sphere.<br/>
            What place of martyrdom is here!<br/>
            Is't life, I ask, is't even prudence,<br/>
            To bore thyself and bore the students?<br/>
            Let Neighbor Paunch to that attend!<br/>
            Why plague thyself with threshing straw forever?<br/>
            The best thou learnest, in the end<br/>
            Thou dar'st not tell the youngsters—never!<br/>
            I hear one's footsteps, hither steering.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">To see him now I have no heart.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            So long the poor boy waits a hearing,<br/>
            He must not unconsoled depart.<br/>
            Thy cap and mantle straightway lend me!<br/>
            I'll play the comedy with art.<br/>
               </p>
        (He disguises himself.)
        <p>
            My wits, be certain, will befriend me.<br/>
            But fifteen minutes' time is all I need;<br/>
            For our fine trip, meanwhile, prepare thyself with speed!<br/>
               </p>
    
    [Exit FAUST]
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (In FAUST'S long mantle.)
        <p>
            Reason and Knowledge only thou despise,<br/>
            The highest strength in man that lies!<br/>
            Let but the Lying Spirit bind thee<br/>
            With magic works and shows that blind thee,<br/>
            And I shall have thee fast and sure!—<br/>
            Fate such a bold, untrammelled spirit gave him,<br/>
            As forwards, onwards, ever must endure;<br/>
            Whose over-hasty impulse drave him<br/>
            Past earthly joys he might secure.<br/>
            Dragged through the wildest life, will I enslave him,<br/>
            Through flat and stale indifference;<br/>
            With struggling, chilling, checking, so deprave him<br/>
            That, to his hot, insatiate sense,<br/>
            The dream of drink shall mock, but never lave him:<br/>
            Refreshment shall his lips in vain implore—<br/>
            Had he not made himself the Devil's, naught could save him,<br/>
            Still were he lost forevermore!<br/>
               </p>

    
    (A STUDENT enters.)
    <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            A short time, only, am I here,<br/>
            And come, devoted and sincere,<br/>
            To greet and know the man of fame,<br/>
            Whom men to me with reverence name.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Your courtesy doth flatter me:<br/>
            You see a man, as others be.<br/>
            Have you, perchance, elsewhere begun?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            Receive me now, I pray, as one<br/>
            Who comes to you with courage good,<br/>
            Somewhat of cash, and healthy blood:<br/>
            My mother was hardly willing to let me;<br/>
            But knowledge worth having I fain would get me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Then you have reached the right place now.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I'd like to leave it, I must avow;<br/>
            I find these walls, these vaulted spaces<br/>
            Are anything but pleasant places.<br/>
            Tis all so cramped and close and mean;<br/>
            One sees no tree, no glimpse of green,<br/>
            And when the lecture-halls receive me,<br/>
            Seeing, hearing, and thinking leave me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            All that depends on habitude.<br/>
            So from its mother's breasts a child<br/>
            At first, reluctant, takes its food,<br/>
            But soon to seek them is beguiled.<br/>
            Thus, at the breasts of Wisdom clinging,<br/>
            Thou'lt find each day a greater rapture bringing.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I'll hang thereon with joy, and freely drain them;<br/>
            But tell me, pray, the proper means to gain them.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Explain, before you further speak,<br/>
            The special faculty you seek.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I crave the highest erudition;<br/>
            And fain would make my acquisition<br/>
            All that there is in Earth and Heaven,<br/>
            In Nature and in Science too.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Here is the genuine path for you;<br/>
            Yet strict attention must be given.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            Body and soul thereon I'll wreak;<br/>
            Yet, truly, I've some inclination<br/>
            On summer holidays to seek<br/>
            A little freedom and recreation.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Use well your time! It flies so swiftly from us;<br/>
            But time through order may be won, I promise.<br/>
            So, Friend (my views to briefly sum),<br/>
            First, the collegium logicum.<br/>
            There will your mind be drilled and braced,<br/>
            As if in Spanish boots 'twere laced,<br/>
            And thus, to graver paces brought,<br/>
            'Twill plod along the path of thought,<br/>
            Instead of shooting here and there,<br/>
            A will-o'-the-wisp in murky air.<br/>
            Days will be spent to bid you know,<br/>
            What once you did at a single blow,<br/>
            Like eating and drinking, free and strong,—<br/>
            That one, two, three! thereto belong.<br/>
            Truly the fabric of mental fleece<br/>
            Resembles a weaver's masterpiece,<br/>
            Where a thousand threads one treadle throws,<br/>
            Where fly the shuttles hither and thither.<br/>
            Unseen the threads are knit together.<br/>
            And an infinite combination grows.<br/>
            Then, the philosopher steps in<br/>
            And shows, no otherwise it could have been:<br/>
            The first was so, the second so,<br/>
            Therefore the third and fourth are so;<br/>
            Were not the first and second, then<br/>
            The third and fourth had never been.<br/>
            The scholars are everywhere believers,<br/>
            But never succeed in being weavers.<br/>
            He who would study organic existence,<br/>
            First drives out the soul with rigid persistence;<br/>
            Then the parts in his hand he may hold and class,<br/>
            But the spiritual link is lost, alas!<br/>
            Encheiresin natures, this Chemistry names,<br/>
            Nor knows how herself she banters and blames!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I cannot understand you quite.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Your mind will shortly be set aright,<br/>
            When you have learned, all things reducing,<br/>
            To classify them for your using.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I feel as stupid, from all you've said,<br/>
            As if a mill-wheel whirled in my head!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And after—first and foremost duty—Of<br/>
            Metaphysics learn the use and beauty!<br/>
            See that you most profoundly gain<br/>
            What does not suit the human brain!<br/>
            A splendid word to serve, you'll find<br/>
            For what goes in—or won't go in—your mind.<br/>
            But first, at least this half a year,<br/>
            To order rigidly adhere;<br/>
            Five hours a day, you understand,<br/>
            And when the clock strikes, be on hand!<br/>
            Prepare beforehand for your part<br/>
            With paragraphs all got by heart,<br/>
            So you can better watch, and look<br/>
            That naught is said but what is in the book:<br/>
            Yet in thy writing as unwearied be,<br/>
            As did the Holy Ghost dictate to thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            No need to tell me twice to do it!<br/>
            I think, how useful 'tis to write;<br/>
            For what one has, in black and white,<br/>
            One carries home and then goes through it.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Yet choose thyself a faculty!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I cannot reconcile myself to Jurisprudence.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Nor can I therefore greatly blame you students:<br/>
            I know what science this has come to be.<br/>
            All rights and laws are still transmitted<br/>
            Like an eternal sickness of the race,—<br/>
            From generation unto generation fitted,<br/>
            And shifted round from place to place.<br/>
            Reason becomes a sham, Beneficence a worry:<br/>
            Thou art a grandchild, therefore woe to thee!<br/>
            The right born with us, ours in verity,<br/>
            This to consider, there's, alas! no hurry.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            My own disgust is strengthened by your speech:<br/>
            O lucky he, whom you shall teach!<br/>
            I've almost for Theology decided.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I should not wish to see you here misguided:<br/>
            For, as regards this science, let me hint<br/>
            'Tis very hard to shun the false direction;<br/>
            There's so much secret poison lurking in 't,<br/>
            So like the medicine, it baffles your detection.<br/>
            Hear, therefore, one alone, for that is best, in sooth,<br/>
            And simply take your master's words for truth.<br/>
            On words let your attention centre!<br/>
            Then through the safest gate you'll enter<br/>
            The temple-halls of Certainty.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            Yet in the word must some idea be.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Of course! But only shun too over-sharp a tension,<br/>
            For just where fails the comprehension,<br/>
            A word steps promptly in as deputy.<br/>
            With words 'tis excellent disputing;<br/>
            Systems to words 'tis easy suiting;<br/>
            On words 'tis excellent believing;<br/>
            No word can ever lose a jot from thieving.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            Pardon! With many questions I detain you.<br/>
            Yet must I trouble you again.<br/>
            Of Medicine I still would fain<br/>
            Hear one strong word that might explain you.<br/>
            Three years is but a little space.<br/>
            And, God! who can the field embrace?<br/>
            If one some index could be shown,<br/>
            'Twere easier groping forward, truly.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (aside)
        <p>
            I'm tired enough of this dry tone,—<br/>
            Must play the Devil again, and fully.<br/>
               </p>
        (Aloud)
        <p>
            To grasp the spirit of Medicine is easy:<br/>
            Learn of the great and little world your fill,<br/>
            To let it go at last, so please ye,<br/>
            Just as God will!<br/>
            In vain that through the realms of science you may drift;<br/>
            Each one learns only—just what learn he can:<br/>
            Yet he who grasps the Moment's gift,<br/>
            He is the proper man.<br/>
            Well-made you are, 'tis not to be denied,<br/>
            The rest a bold address will win you;<br/>
            If you but in yourself confide,<br/>
            At once confide all others in you.<br/>
            To lead the women, learn the special feeling!<br/>
            Their everlasting aches and groans,<br/>
            In thousand tones,<br/>
            Have all one source, one mode of healing;<br/>
            And if your acts are half discreet,<br/>
            You'll always have them at your feet.<br/>
            A title first must draw and interest them,<br/>
            And show that yours all other arts exceeds;<br/>
            Then, as a greeting, you are free to touch and test them,<br/>
            While, thus to do, for years another pleads.<br/>
            You press and count the pulse's dances,<br/>
            And then, with burning sidelong glances,<br/>
            You clasp the swelling hips, to see<br/>
            If tightly laced her corsets be.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            That's better, now! The How and Where, one sees.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            My worthy friend, gray are all theories,<br/>
            And green alone Life's golden tree.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I swear to you, 'tis like a dream to me.<br/>
            Might I again presume, with trust unbounded,<br/>
            To hear your wisdom thoroughly expounded?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Most willingly, to what extent I may.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            I cannot really go away:<br/>
            Allow me that my album first I reach you,—<br/>
            Grant me this favor, I beseech you!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Assuredly.<br/>
               </p>

    
    (He writes, and returns the book.)
    <br/>
               <b>STUDENT</b>
        (reads)
        <p>
            Eritis sicut Deus, scientes bonum et malum.<br/>
            (Closes the book with reverence, and withdraws)
        </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Follow the ancient text, and the snake thou wast ordered to trample!<br/>
            With all thy likeness to God, thou'lt yet be a sorry example!<br/>
               </p>

    
    (FAUST enters.)
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Now, whither shall we go?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            As best it pleases thee.<br/>
            The little world, and then the great, we'll see.<br/>
            With what delight, what profit winning,<br/>
            Shalt thou sponge through the term beginning!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Yet with the flowing beard I wear,<br/>
                Both ease and grace will fail me there.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">The attempt, indeed, were a futile strife;<br/>
                I never could learn the ways of life.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I feel so small before others, and thence<br/>
                Should always find embarrassments.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            My friend, thou soon shalt lose all such misgiving:<br/>
            Be thou but self-possessed, thou hast the art of living!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">How shall we leave the house, and start?<br/>
                Where hast thou servant, coach and horses?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            We'll spread this cloak with proper art,<br/>
            Then through the air direct our courses.<br/>
            But only, on so bold a flight,<br/>
            Be sure to have thy luggage light.<br/>
            A little burning air, which I shall soon prepare us,<br/>
            Above the earth will nimbly bear us,<br/>
            And, if we're light, we'll travel swift and clear:<br/>
            I gratulate thee on thy new career!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
