<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XXII</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>XXII. WALPURGIS-NIGHT'S DREAM</h1>
               <hr/>
    OBERON AND TITANIA's GOLDEN WEDDING
    INTERMEZZO
    <br/>
               <b>MANAGER</b>
               <p>
            Sons of Mieding, rest to-day!<br/>
            Needless your machinery:<br/>
            Misty vale and mountain gray,<br/>
            That is all the scenery.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>HERALD</b>
               <p>
            That the wedding golden be.<br/>
            Must fifty years be rounded:<br/>
            But the Golden give to me,<br/>
            When the strife's compounded.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>OBERON</b>
               <p>
            Spirits, if you're here, be seen—<br/>
            Show yourselves, delighted!<br/>
            Fairy king and fairy queen,<br/>
            They are newly plighted.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PUCK</b>
               <p>
            Cometh Puck, and, light of limb,<br/>
            Whisks and whirls in measure:<br/>
            Come a hundred after him,<br/>
            To share with him the pleasure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ARIEL</b>
               <p>
            Ariel's song is heavenly-pure,<br/>
            His tones are sweet and rare ones:<br/>
            Though ugly faces he allure,<br/>
            Yet he allures the fair ones.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>OBERON</b>
               <p>
            Spouses, who would fain agree,<br/>
            Learn how we were mated!<br/>
            If your pairs would loving be,<br/>
            First be separated!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>TITANIA</b>
               <p>
            If her whims the wife control,<br/>
            And the man berate her,<br/>
            Take him to the Northern Pole,<br/>
            And her to the Equator!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ORCHESTRA</b>
        TUTTI
        Fortissimo.
        <p>
            Snout of fly, mosquito-bill,<br/>
            And kin of all conditions,<br/>
            Frog in grass, and cricket-trill,—<br/>
            These are the musicians!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SOLO</b>
               <p>
            See the bagpipe on our track!<br/>
            'Tis the soap-blown bubble:<br/>
            Hear the schnecke-schnicke-schnack<br/>
            Through his nostrils double!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRIT, JUST GROWING INTO FORM</b>
               <p>
            Spider's foot and paunch of toad,<br/>
            And little wings—we know 'em!<br/>
            A little creature 'twill not be,<br/>
            But yet, a little poem.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A LITTLE COUPLE</b>
               <p>
            Little step and lofty leap<br/>
            Through honey-dew and fragrance:<br/>
            You'll never mount the airy steep<br/>
            With all your tripping vagrance.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>INQUISITIVE TRAVELLER</b>
               <p>
            Is't but masquerading play?<br/>
            See I with precision?<br/>
            Oberon, the beauteous fay,<br/>
            Meets, to-night, my vision!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ORTHODOX</b>
               <p>
            Not a claw, no tail I see!<br/>
            And yet, beyond a cavil,<br/>
            Like "the Gods of Greece," must he<br/>
            Also be a devil.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>NORTHERN ARTIST</b>
               <p>
            I only seize, with sketchy air,<br/>
            Some outlines of the tourney;<br/>
            Yet I betimes myself prepare<br/>
            For my Italian journey.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PURIST</b>
               <p>
            My bad luck brings me here, alas!<br/>
            How roars the orgy louder!<br/>
            And of the witches in the mass,<br/>
            But only two wear powder.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>YOUNG WITCH</b>
               <p>
            Powder becomes, like petticoat,<br/>
            A gray and wrinkled noddy;<br/>
            So I sit naked on my goat,<br/>
            And show a strapping body.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MATRON</b>
               <p>
            We've too much tact and policy<br/>
            To rate with gibes a scolder;<br/>
            Yet, young and tender though you be,<br/>
            I hope to see you moulder.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>LEADER OF THE BAND</b>
               <p>
            Fly-snout and mosquito-bill,<br/>
            Don't swarm so round the Naked!<br/>
            Frog in grass and cricket-trill,<br/>
            Observe the time, and make it!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WEATHERCOCK</b>
        (towards one side)
        <p>
            Society to one's desire!<br/>
            Brides only, and the sweetest!<br/>
            And bachelors of youth and fire.<br/>
            And prospects the completest!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WEATHERCOCK</b>
        (towards the other side)
        <p>
            And if the Earth don't open now<br/>
            To swallow up each ranter,<br/>
            Why, then will I myself, I vow,<br/>
            Jump into hell instanter!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>XENIES</b>
               <p>
            Us as little insects see!<br/>
            With sharpest nippers flitting,<br/>
            That our Papa Satan we<br/>
            May honor as is fitting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>HENNINGS</b>
               <p>
            How, in crowds together massed,<br/>
            They are jesting, shameless!<br/>
            They will even say, at last,<br/>
            That their hearts are blameless.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MUSAGETES</b>
               <p>
            Among this witches' revelry<br/>
            His way one gladly loses;<br/>
            And, truly, it would easier be<br/>
            Than to command the Muses.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CI-DEVANT GENIUS OF THE AGE</b>
               <p>
            The proper folks one's talents laud:<br/>
            Come on, and none shall pass us!<br/>
            The Blocksberg has a summit broad,<br/>
            Like Germany's Parnassus.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>INQUISITIVE TRAVELLER</b>
               <p>
            Say, who's the stiff and pompous man?<br/>
            He walks with haughty paces:<br/>
            He snuffles all he snuffle can:<br/>
            "He scents the Jesuits' traces."<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CRANE</b>
               <p>
            Both clear and muddy streams, for me<br/>
            Are good to fish and sport in:<br/>
            And thus the pious man you see<br/>
            With even devils consorting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WORLDLING</b>
               <p>
            Yes, for the pious, I suspect,<br/>
            All instruments are fitting;<br/>
            And on the Blocksberg they erect<br/>
            Full many a place of meeting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>DANCER</b>
               <p>
            A newer chorus now succeeds!<br/>
            I hear the distant drumming.<br/>
            "Don't be disturbed! 'tis, in the reeds,<br/>
            The bittern's changeless booming."<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>DANCING-MASTER</b>
               <p>
            How each his legs in nimble trip<br/>
            Lifts up, and makes a clearance!<br/>
            The crooked jump, the heavy skip,<br/>
            Nor care for the appearance.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>GOOD FELLOW</b>
               <p>
            The rabble by such hate are held,<br/>
            To maim and slay delights them:<br/>
            As Orpheus' lyre the brutes compelled,<br/>
            The bagpipe here unites them.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>DOGMATIST</b>
               <p>
            I'll not be led by any lure<br/>
            Of doubts or critic-cavils:<br/>
            The Devil must be something, sure,—<br/>
            Or how should there be devils?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>IDEALIST</b>
               <p>
            This once, the fancy wrought in me<br/>
            Is really too despotic:<br/>
            Forsooth, if I am all I see,<br/>
            I must be idiotic!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>REALIST</b>
               <p>
            This racking fuss on every hand,<br/>
            It gives me great vexation;<br/>
            And, for the first time, here I stand<br/>
            On insecure foundation.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SUPERNATURALIST</b>
               <p>
            With much delight I see the play,<br/>
            And grant to these their merits,<br/>
            Since from the devils I also may<br/>
            Infer the better spirits.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SCEPTIC</b>
               <p>
            The flame they follow, on and on,<br/>
            And think they're near the treasure:<br/>
            But Devil rhymes with Doubt alone,<br/>
            So I am here with pleasure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>LEADER OF THE BAND</b>
               <p>
            Frog in green, and cricket-trill.<br/>
            Such dilettants!—perdition!<br/>
            Fly-snout and mosquito-bill,—<br/>
            Each one's a fine musician!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE ADROIT</b>
               <p>
            Sans souci, we call the clan<br/>
            Of merry creatures so, then;<br/>
            Go a-foot no more we can,<br/>
            And on our heads we go, then.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE AWKWARD</b>
               <p>
            Once many a bit we sponged, but now,<br/>
            God help us! that is done with:<br/>
            Our shoes are all danced out, we trow,<br/>
            We've but naked soles to run with.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WILL-O'-THE WISPS</b>
               <p>
            From the marshes we appear,<br/>
            Where we originated;<br/>
            Yet in the ranks, at once, we're here<br/>
            As glittering gallants rated.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SHOOTING-STAR</b>
               <p>
            Darting hither from the sky,<br/>
            In star and fire light shooting,<br/>
            Cross-wise now in grass I lie:<br/>
            Who'll help me to my footing?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE HEAVY FELLOWS</b>
               <p>
            Room! and round about us, room!<br/>
            Trodden are the grasses:<br/>
            Spirits also, spirits come,<br/>
            And they are bulky masses.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PUCK</b>
               <p>
            Enter not so stall-fed quite,<br/>
            Like elephant-calves about one!<br/>
            And the heaviest weight to-night<br/>
            Be Puck, himself, the stout one!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ARIEL</b>
               <p>
            If loving Nature at your back,<br/>
            Or Mind, the wings uncloses,<br/>
            Follow up my airy track<br/>
            To the mount of roses!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ORCHESTRA</b>
        pianissimo
        <p>
            Cloud and trailing mist o'erhead<br/>
            Are now illuminated:<br/>
            Air in leaves, and wind in reed,<br/>
            And all is dissipated.<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
