<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XII</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>XII. GARDEN</h1>
               <hr/>
    (MARGARET on FAUST'S arm. MARTHA and MEPHISTOPHELES walking up and down.)
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I feel, the gentleman allows for me,<br/>
            Demeans himself, and shames me by it;<br/>
            A traveller is so used to be<br/>
            Kindly content with any diet.<br/>
            I know too well that my poor gossip can<br/>
            Ne'er entertain such an experienced man.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">
                A look from thee, a word, more entertains<br/>
                Than all the lore of wisest brains.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He kisses her hand.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Don't incommode yourself! How could you ever kiss it!<br/>
            It is so ugly, rough to see!<br/>
            What work I do,—how hard and steady is it!<br/>
            Mother is much too close with me.<br/>
               </p>
        [They pass.]
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            And you, Sir, travel always, do you not?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Alas, that trade and duty us so harry!<br/>
            With what a pang one leaves so many a spot,<br/>
            And dares not even now and then to tarry!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            In young, wild years it suits your ways,<br/>
            This round and round the world in freedom sweeping;<br/>
            But then come on the evil days,<br/>
            And so, as bachelor, into his grave a-creeping,<br/>
            None ever found a thing to praise.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I dread to see how such a fate advances.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Then, worthy Sir, improve betimes your chances!<br/>
               </p>
        [They pass.]
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Yes, out of sight is out of mind!<br/>
            Your courtesy an easy grace is;<br/>
            But you have friends in other places,<br/>
            And sensibler than I, you'll find.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Trust me, dear heart! what men call sensible<br/>
                Is oft mere vanity and narrowness.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            How so?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Ah, that simplicity and innocence ne'er know<br/>
                Themselves, their holy value, and their spell!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">That meekness, lowliness, the highest graces<br/>
                Which Nature portions out so lovingly—<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            So you but think a moment's space on me,<br/>
            All times I'll have to think on you, all places!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">No doubt you're much alone?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Yes, for our household small has grown,<br/>
            Yet must be cared for, you will own.<br/>
            We have no maid: I do the knitting, sewing, sweeping,<br/>
            The cooking, early work and late, in fact;<br/>
            And mother, in her notions of housekeeping,<br/>
            Is so exact!<br/>
            Not that she needs so much to keep expenses down:<br/>
            We, more than others, might take comfort, rather:<br/>
            A nice estate was left us by my father,<br/>
            A house, a little garden near the town.<br/>
            But now my days have less of noise and hurry;<br/>
            My brother is a soldier,<br/>
            My little sister's dead.<br/>
            True, with the child a troubled life I led,<br/>
            Yet I would take again, and willing, all the worry,<br/>
            So very dear was she.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">An angel, if like thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I brought it up, and it was fond of me.<br/>
            Father had died before it saw the light,<br/>
            And mother's case seemed hopeless quite,<br/>
            So weak and miserable she lay;<br/>
            And she recovered, then, so slowly, day by day.<br/>
            She could not think, herself, of giving<br/>
            The poor wee thing its natural living;<br/>
            And so I nursed it all alone<br/>
            With milk and water: 'twas my own.<br/>
            Lulled in my lap with many a song,<br/>
            It smiled, and tumbled, and grew strong.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">The purest bliss was surely then thy dower.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            But surely, also, many a weary hour.<br/>
            I kept the baby's cradle near<br/>
            My bed at night: if 't even stirred, I'd guess it,<br/>
            And waking, hear.<br/>
            And I must nurse it, warm beside me press it,<br/>
            And oft, to quiet it, my bed forsake,<br/>
            And dandling back and forth the restless creature take,<br/>
            Then at the wash-tub stand, at morning's break;<br/>
            And then the marketing and kitchen-tending,<br/>
            Day after day, the same thing, never-ending.<br/>
            One's spirits, Sir, are thus not always good,<br/>
            But then one learns to relish rest and food.<br/>
               </p>
        [They pass.]
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Yes, the poor women are bad off, 'tis true:<br/>
            A stubborn bachelor there's no converting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            It but depends upon the like of you,<br/>
            And I should turn to better ways than flirting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Speak plainly, Sir, have you no one detected?<br/>
            Has not your heart been anywhere subjected?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The proverb says: One's own warm hearth<br/>
            And a good wife, are gold and jewels worth.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            I mean, have you not felt desire, though ne'er so slightly?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I've everywhere, in fact, been entertained politely.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            I meant to say, were you not touched in earnest, ever?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            One should allow one's self to jest with ladies never.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Ah, you don't understand!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I'm sorry I'm so blind: But I am sure—that you are very kind.<br/>
               </p>
        [They pass.]
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">And me, thou angel! didst thou recognize,<br/>
                As through the garden-gate I came?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Did you not see it? I cast down my eyes.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">And thou forgiv'st my freedom, and the blame<br/>
                To my impertinence befitting,<br/>
                As the Cathedral thou wert quitting?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I was confused, the like ne'er happened me;<br/>
            No one could ever speak to my discredit.<br/>
            Ah, thought I, in my conduct has he read it—<br/>
            Something immodest or unseemly free?<br/>
            He seemed to have the sudden feeling<br/>
            That with this wench 'twere very easy dealing.<br/>
            I will confess, I knew not what appeal<br/>
            On your behalf, here, in my bosom grew;<br/>
            But I was angry with myself, to feel<br/>
            That I could not be angrier with you.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Sweet darling!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Wait a while!<br/>
               </p>
        (She plucks a star-flower, and pulls off the leaves, one after the other.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Shall that a nosegay be?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            No, it is just in play.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">How?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Go! you'll laugh at me.<br/>
               </p>
        (She pulls off the leaves and murmurs.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">What murmurest thou?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (half aloud)
        <p>
            He loves me—loves me not.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thou sweet, angelic soul!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (continues)
        <p>
            Loves me—not—loves me—not—<br/>
            (plucking the last leaf, she cries with frank delight:)
        </p>
               <p>
            He loves me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Yes, child! and let this blossom-word<br/>
                For thee be speech divine! He loves thee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Ah, know'st thou what it means? He loves thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He grasps both her hands.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I'm all a-tremble!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">O tremble not! but let this look,<br/>
                Let this warm clasp of hands declare thee<br/>
                What is unspeakable!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">To yield one wholly, and to feel a rapture<br/>
                In yielding, that must be eternal!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Eternal!—for the end would be despair.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">No, no,—no ending! no ending!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
        (coming forward)
        <p>
            The night is falling.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Ay! we must away.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            I'd ask you, longer here to tarry,<br/>
            But evil tongues in this town have full play.<br/>
            It's as if nobody had nothing to fetch and carry,<br/>
            Nor other labor,<br/>
            But spying all the doings of one's neighbor:<br/>
            And one becomes the talk, do whatsoe'er one may.<br/>
            Where is our couple now?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Flown up the alley yonder,<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            The wilful summer-birds!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            He seems of her still fonder.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And she of him. So runs the world away!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
