<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene X</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>X. THE NEIGHBOR'S HOUSE</h1>
               <hr/>
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
        (solus)
        <p>
            God forgive my husband, yet he<br/>
            Hasn't done his duty by me!<br/>
            Off in the world he went straightway,—<br/>
            Left me lie in the straw where I lay.<br/>
            And, truly, I did naught to fret him:<br/>
            God knows I loved, and can't forget him!<br/>
               </p>
        (She weeps.)
        <p>
            Perhaps he's even dead! Ah, woe!—<br/>
            Had I a certificate to show!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET </b>
        (comes)
        <p>
            Dame Martha!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Margaret! what's happened thee?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I scarce can stand, my knees are trembling!<br/>
            I find a box, the first resembling,<br/>
            Within my press! Of ebony,—<br/>
            And things, all splendid to behold,<br/>
            And richer far than were the old.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            You mustn't tell it to your mother!<br/>
            'Twould go to the priest, as did the other.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Ah, look and see—just look and see!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA </b>
        (adorning her)
        <p>
            O, what a blessed luck for thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            But, ah! in the streets I dare not bear them,<br/>
            Nor in the church be seen to wear them.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Yet thou canst often this way wander,<br/>
            And secretly the jewels don,<br/>
            Walk up and down an hour, before the mirror yonder,—<br/>
            We'll have our private joy thereon.<br/>
            And then a chance will come, a holiday,<br/>
            When, piece by piece, can one the things abroad display,<br/>
            A chain at first, then other ornament:<br/>
            Thy mother will not see, and stories we'll invent.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Whoever could have brought me things so precious?<br/>
            That something's wrong, I feel suspicious.<br/>
               </p>
        (A knock)
        <p>
            Good Heaven! My mother can that have been?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA </b>
        (peeping through the blind)
        <p>
            'Tis some strange gentleman.—Come in!<br/>
               </p>
        (MEPHISTOPHELES enters.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            That I so boldly introduce me,<br/>
            I beg you, ladies, to excuse me.<br/>
               </p>
        (Steps back reverently, on seeing MARGARET.)
        <p>
            For Martha Schwerdtlein I'd inquire!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            I'm she: what does the gentleman desire?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES </b>
        (aside to her)
        <p>
            It is enough that you are she:<br/>
            You've a visitor of high degree.<br/>
            Pardon the freedom I have ta'en,—<br/>
            Will after noon return again.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA </b>
        (aloud)
        <p>
            Of all things in the world! Just hear—<br/>
            He takes thee for a lady, dear!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I am a creature young and poor:<br/>
            The gentleman's too kind, I'm sure.<br/>
            The jewels don't belong to me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Ah, not alone the jewelry!<br/>
            The look, the manner, both betray—<br/>
            Rejoiced am I that I may stay!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            What is your business? I would fain—<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I would I had a more cheerful strain!<br/>
            Take not unkindly its repeating:<br/>
            Your husband's dead, and sends a greeting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Is dead? Alas, that heart so true!<br/>
            My husband dead! Let me die, too!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Ah, dearest dame, let not your courage fail!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Hear me relate the mournful tale!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Therefore I'd never love, believe me!<br/>
            A loss like this to death would grieve me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Joy follows woe, woe after joy comes flying.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Relate his life's sad close to me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            In Padua buried, he is lying<br/>
            Beside the good Saint Antony,<br/>
            Within a grave well consecrated,<br/>
            For cool, eternal rest created.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            He gave you, further, no commission?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Yes, one of weight, with many sighs:<br/>
            Three hundred masses buy, to save him from perdition!<br/>
            My hands are empty, otherwise.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            What! Not a pocket-piece? no jewelry?<br/>
            What every journeyman within his wallet spares,<br/>
            And as a token with him bears,<br/>
            And rather starves or begs, than loses?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Madam, it is a grief to me;<br/>
            Yet, on my word, his cash was put to proper uses.<br/>
            Besides, his penitence was very sore,<br/>
            And he lamented his ill fortune all the more.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Alack, that men are so unfortunate!<br/>
            Surely for his soul's sake full many a prayer I'll proffer.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            You well deserve a speedy marriage-offer:<br/>
            You are so kind, compassionate.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            O, no! As yet, it would not do.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            If not a husband, then a beau for you!<br/>
            It is the greatest heavenly blessing,<br/>
            To have a dear thing for one's caressing.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            The country's custom is not so.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Custom, or not! It happens, though.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Continue, pray!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I stood beside his bed of dying.<br/>
            'Twas something better than manure,—<br/>
            Half-rotten straw: and yet, he died a Christian, sure,<br/>
            And found that heavier scores to his account were lying.<br/>
            He cried: "I find my conduct wholly hateful!<br/>
            To leave my wife, my trade, in manner so ungrateful!<br/>
            Ah, the remembrance makes me die!<br/>
            Would of my wrong to her I might be shriven!"<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA </b>
        (weeping)
        <p>
            The dear, good man! Long since was he forgiven.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            "Yet she, God knows! was more to blame than I."<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            He lied! What! On the brink of death he slandered?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            In the last throes his senses wandered,<br/>
            If I such things but half can judge.<br/>
            He said: "I had no time for play, for gaping freedom:<br/>
            First children, and then work for bread to feed 'em,—<br/>
            For bread, in the widest sense, to drudge,<br/>
            And could not even eat my share in peace and quiet!"<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Had he all love, all faith forgotten in his riot?<br/>
            My work and worry, day and night?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Not so: the memory of it touched him quite.<br/>
            Said he: "When I from Malta went away<br/>
            My prayers for wife and little ones were zealous,<br/>
            And such a luck from Heaven befell us,<br/>
            We made a Turkish merchantman our prey,<br/>
            That to the Soldan bore a mighty treasure.<br/>
            Then I received, as was most fit,<br/>
            Since bravery was paid in fullest measure,<br/>
            My well-apportioned share of it."<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Say, how? Say, where? If buried, did he own it?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Who knows, now, whither the four winds have blown it?<br/>
            A fair young damsel took him in her care,<br/>
            As he in Naples wandered round, unfriended;<br/>
            And she much love, much faith to him did bear,<br/>
            So that he felt it till his days were ended.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            The villain! From his children thieving!<br/>
            Even all the misery on him cast<br/>
            Could not prevent his shameful way of living!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            But see! He's dead therefrom, at last.<br/>
            Were I in your place, do not doubt me,<br/>
            I'd mourn him decently a year,<br/>
            And for another keep, meanwhile, my eyes about me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Ah, God! another one so dear<br/>
            As was my first, this world will hardly give me.<br/>
            There never was a sweeter fool than mine,<br/>
            Only he loved to roam and leave me,<br/>
            And foreign wenches and foreign wine,<br/>
            And the damned throw of dice, indeed.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Well, well! That might have done, however,<br/>
            If he had only been as clever,<br/>
            And treated your slips with as little heed.<br/>
            I swear, with this condition, too,<br/>
            I would, myself, change rings with you.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            The gentleman is pleased to jest.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I'll cut away, betimes, from here:<br/>
            She'd take the Devil at his word, I fear.<br/>
               </p>
        (To MARGARET)
        <p>
            How fares the heart within your breast?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            What means the gentleman?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (aside)
        <p>
            Sweet innocent, thou art!<br/>
               </p>
        (Aloud.)
        <p>
            Ladies, farewell!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Farewell!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            A moment, ere we part!<br/>
            I'd like to have a legal witness,<br/>
            Where, how, and when he died, to certify his fitness.<br/>
            Irregular ways I've always hated;<br/>
            I want his death in the weekly paper stated.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Yes, my good dame, a pair of witnesses<br/>
            Always the truth establishes.<br/>
            I have a friend of high condition,<br/>
            Who'll also add his deposition.<br/>
            I'll bring him here.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Good Sir, pray do!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And this young lady will be present, too?<br/>
            A gallant youth! has travelled far:<br/>
            Ladies with him delighted are.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Before him I should blush, ashamed.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Before no king that could be named!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Behind the house, in my garden, then,<br/>
            This eve we'll expect the gentlemen.<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
