<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XVIII</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">

               <h1>XVIII. DONJON</h1>
               <hr/>

(In a niche of the wall a shrine, with an image of the Mater
Dolorosa. Pots of flowers before it.)

<br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>

(putting fresh flowers in the pots)

<p>Incline, O Maiden,<br/>
Thou sorrow-laden,<br/>
Thy gracious countenance upon my pain!<br/>
               </p>

               <p>The sword Thy heart in,<br/>
With anguish smarting,<br/>
Thou lookest up to where Thy Son is slain!<br/>
               </p>

               <p>Thou seest the Father;<br/>
Thy sad sighs gather,<br/>
And bear aloft Thy sorrow and His pain!<br/>
               </p>

               <p>Ah, past guessing,<br/>
Beyond expressing,<br/>
The pangs that wring my flesh and bone!<br/>
Why this anxious heart so burneth,<br/>
Why it trembleth, why it yearneth,<br/>
Knowest Thou, and Thou alone!<br/>
               </p>

               <p>Where'er I go, what sorrow,<br/>
What woe, what woe and sorrow<br/>
Within my bosom aches!<br/>
Alone, and ah! unsleeping,<br/>
I'm weeping, weeping, weeping,<br/>
The heart within me breaks.<br/>
               </p>

               <p>The pots before my window,<br/>
Alas! my tears did wet,<br/>
As in the early morning<br/>
For thee these flowers I set.<br/>
               </p>

               <p>Within my lonely chamber<br/>
The morning sun shone red:<br/>
I sat, in utter sorrow,<br/>
Already on my bed.<br/>
               </p>

               <p>Help! rescue me from death and stain!<br/>
O Maiden!<br/>
Thou sorrow-laden,<br/>
Incline Thy countenance upon my pain!<br/>
               </p>


            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
