<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene VI</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>VI. WITCHES' KITCHEN</h1>
               <hr/>
    (Upon a low hearth stands a great caldron, under which a fire is burning. Various figures
        appear in the vapors which rise from the caldron. An ape sits beside it, skims it, and
        watches lest it boil over. The he-ape, with the young ones, sits near and warms himself.
        Ceiling and walls are covered with the most fantastic witch-implements.)
    FAUST MEPHISTOPHELES
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">
                These crazy signs of witches' craft repel me!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I shall recover, dost thou tell me,<br/>
                Through this insane, chaotic play?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">From an old hag shall I demand assistance?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And will her foul mess take away<br/>
                Full thirty years from my existence?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Woe's me, canst thou naught better find!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Another baffled hope must be lamented:<br/>
                Has Nature, then, and has a noble mind<br/>
                Not any potent balsam yet invented?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Once more, my friend, thou talkest sensibly.<br/>
            There is, to make thee young, a simpler mode and apter;<br/>
            But in another book 'tis writ for thee,<br/>
            And is a most eccentric chapter.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Yet will I know it.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Good! the method is revealed<br/>
            Without or gold or magic or physician.<br/>
            Betake thyself to yonder field,<br/>
            There hoe and dig, as thy condition;<br/>
            Restrain thyself, thy sense and will<br/>
            Within a narrow sphere to flourish;<br/>
            With unmixed food thy body nourish;<br/>
            Live with the ox as ox, and think it not a theft<br/>
            That thou manur'st the acre which thou reapest;—<br/>
            That, trust me, is the best mode left,<br/>
            Whereby for eighty years thy youth thou keepest!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">I am not used to that; I cannot stoop to try it—<br/>
                To take the spade in hand, and ply it.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The narrow being suits me not at all.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Then to thine aid the witch must call.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Wherefore the hag, and her alone?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Canst thou thyself not brew the potion?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            That were a charming sport, I own:<br/>
            I'd build a thousand bridges meanwhile, I've a notion.<br/>
            Not Art and Science serve, alone;<br/>
            Patience must in the work be shown.<br/>
            Long is the calm brain active in creation;<br/>
            Time, only, strengthens the fine fermentation.<br/>
            And all, belonging thereunto,<br/>
            Is rare and strange, howe'er you take it:<br/>
            The Devil taught the thing, 'tis true,<br/>
            And yet the Devil cannot make it.<br/>
            (Perceiving the Animals)
            See, what a delicate race they be!<br/>
            That is the maid! the man is he!<br/>
            (To the Animals)
            It seems the mistress has gone away?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE ANIMALS</b>
               <p>
            Carousing, to-day!<br/>
            Off and about,<br/>
            By the chimney out!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            What time takes she for dissipating?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE ANIMALS</b>
               <p>
            While we to warm our paws are waiting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            How findest thou the tender creatures?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
            Absurder than I ever yet did see.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Why, just such talk as this, for me,<br/>
            Is that which has the most attractive features!<br/>
               </p>
        (To the Animals)
        <p>
            But tell me now, ye cursed puppets,<br/>
            Why do ye stir the porridge so?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE ANIMALS</b>
               <p>
            We're cooking watery soup for beggars.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Then a great public you can show.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE HE-APE</b>
        (comes up and fawns on MEPHISTOPHELES)
        <p>
            O cast thou the dice!<br/>
            Make me rich in a trice,<br/>
            Let me win in good season!<br/>
            Things are badly controlled,<br/>
            And had I but gold,<br/>
            So had I my reason.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            How would the ape be sure his luck enhances.<br/>
            Could he but try the lottery's chances!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (In the meantime the young apes have been playing with a large ball, which they now roll
        forward.)
    <br/>
               <b>THE HE-APE</b>
               <p>
            The world's the ball:<br/>
            Doth rise and fall,<br/>
            And roll incessant:<br/>
            Like glass doth ring,<br/>
            A hollow thing,—<br/>
            How soon will't spring,<br/>
            And drop, quiescent?<br/>
            Here bright it gleams,<br/>
            Here brighter seems:<br/>
            I live at present!<br/>
            Dear son, I say,<br/>
            Keep thou away!<br/>
            Thy doom is spoken!<br/>
            'Tis made of clay,<br/>
            And will be broken.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            What means the sieve?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE HE-APE</b>
        (taking it down)
        <p>
            Wert thou the thief,<br/>
            I'd know him and shame him.<br/>
               </p>
        (He runs to the SHE-APE, and lets her look through it.)
        <p>
            Look through the sieve!<br/>
            Know'st thou the thief,<br/>
            And darest not name him?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (approaching the fire)
        <p>
            And what's this pot?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>HE-APE AND SHE-APE</b>
               <p>
            The fool knows it not!<br/>
            He knows not the pot,<br/>
            He knows not the kettle!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Impertinent beast!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE HE-APE</b>
               <p>
            Take the brush here, at least,<br/>
            And sit down on the settle!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (He invites MEPHISTOPHELES to sit down.)
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">(who during all this time has been standing before a mirror, now
                    approaching and now retreating from it)</span>
                  <span class="divine">What do I see? What heavenly form revealed<br/>
                Shows through the glass from Magic's fair dominions!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">O lend me, Love, the swiftest of thy pinions,<br/>
                And bear me to her beauteous field!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Ah, if I leave this spot with fond designing,<br/>
                If I attempt to venture near,<br/>
                Dim, as through gathering mist, her charms appear!—<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">A woman's form, in beauty shining!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Can woman, then, so lovely be?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And must I find her body, there reclining,<br/>
                Of all the heavens the bright epitome?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Can Earth with such a thing be mated?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Why, surely, if a God first plagues Himself six days,<br/>
            Then, self-contented, Bravo! says,<br/>
            Must something clever be created.<br/>
            This time, thine eyes be satiate!<br/>
            I'll yet detect thy sweetheart and ensnare her,<br/>
            And blest is he, who has the lucky fate,<br/>
            Some day, as bridegroom, home to bear her.<br/>
               </p>
        (FAUST gazes continually in the mirror. MEPHISTOPHELES, stretching himself out on the
            settle, and playing with the brush, continues to speak.)
        <p>
            So sit I, like the King upon his throne:<br/>
            I hold the sceptre, here,—and lack the crown alone.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE ANIMALS</b>
        (who up to this time have been making all kinds of fantastic movements together bring
            a crown to MEPHISTOPHELES with great noise.)
        <p>
            O be thou so good<br/>
            With sweat and with blood<br/>
            The crown to belime!<br/>
               </p>
        (They handle the crown awkwardly and break it into two pieces, with which they spring
            around.)
        <p>
            'Tis done, let it be!<br/>
            We speak and we see,<br/>
            We hear and we rhyme!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (before the mirror)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Woe's me! I fear to lose my wits.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (pointing to the Animals)
        <p>
            My own head, now, is really nigh to sinking.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE ANIMALS</b>
               <p>
            If lucky our hits,<br/>
            And everything fits,<br/>
            'Tis thoughts, and we're thinking!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (as above)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">My bosom burns with that sweet vision;<br/>
                Let us, with speed, away from here!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (in the same attitude)
        <p>
            One must, at least, make this admission—<br/>
            They're poets, genuine and sincere.<br/>
               </p>
    
    (The caldron, which the SHE-APE has up to this time neglected to watch, begins to boil
        over: there ensues a great flame, which blazes out the chimney. The WITCH comes careering
        down through the flame, with terrible cries.)
    <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            Ow! ow! ow! ow!<br/>
            The damnéd beast—the curséd sow!<br/>
            To leave the kettle, and singe the Frau!<br/>
            Accurséd fere!<br/>
               </p>
        (Perceiving FAUST and MEPHISTOPHELES.)
        <p>
            What is that here?<br/>
            Who are you here?<br/>
            What want you thus?<br/>
            Who sneaks to us?<br/>
            The fire-pain<br/>
            Burn bone and brain!<br/>
               </p>
        (She plunges the skimming-ladle into the caldron, and scatters flames towards FAUST,
            MEPHISTOPHELES, and the Animals. The Animals whimper.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (reversing the brush, which he has been holding in his hand, and striding among the
            jars and glasses)
        <p>
            In two! in two!<br/>
            There lies the brew!<br/>
            There lies the glass!<br/>
            The joke will pass,<br/>
            As time, foul ass!<br/>
            To the singing of thy crew.<br/>
               </p>
        (As the WITCH starts back, full of wrath and horror)
        <p>
            Ha! know'st thou me? Abomination, thou!<br/>
            Know'st thou, at last, thy Lord and Master?<br/>
            What hinders me from smiting now<br/>
            Thee and thy monkey-sprites with fell disaster?<br/>
            Hast for the scarlet coat no reverence?<br/>
            Dost recognize no more the tall cock's-feather?<br/>
            Have I concealed this countenance?—<br/>
            Must tell my name, old face of leather?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            O pardon, Sir, the rough salute!<br/>
            Yet I perceive no cloven foot;<br/>
            And both your ravens, where are they now?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            This time, I'll let thee 'scape the debt;<br/>
            For since we two together met,<br/>
            'Tis verily full many a day now.<br/>
            Culture, which smooth the whole world licks,<br/>
            Also unto the Devil sticks.<br/>
            The days of that old Northern phantom now are over:<br/>
            Where canst thou horns and tail and claws discover?<br/>
            And, as regards the foot, which I can't spare, in truth,<br/>
            'Twould only make the people shun me;<br/>
            Therefore I've worn, like many a spindly youth,<br/>
            False calves these many years upon me.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
        (dancing)
        <p>
            Reason and sense forsake my brain,<br/>
            Since I behold Squire Satan here again!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Woman, from such a name refrain!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            Why so? What has it done to thee?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            It's long been written in the Book of Fable;<br/>
            Yet, therefore, no whit better men we see:<br/>
            The Evil One has left, the evil ones are stable.<br/>
            Sir Baron call me thou, then is the matter good;<br/>
            A cavalier am I, like others in my bearing.<br/>
            Thou hast no doubt about my noble blood:<br/>
            See, here's the coat-of-arms that I am wearing!<br/>
               </p>
        (He makes an indecent gesture.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
        (laughs immoderately)
        <p>
            Ha! ha! That's just your way, I know:<br/>
            A rogue you are, and you were always so.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            My friend, take proper heed, I pray!<br/>
            To manage witches, this is just the way.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            Wherein, Sirs, can I be of use?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Give us a goblet of the well-known juice!<br/>
            But, I must beg you, of the oldest brewage;<br/>
            The years a double strength produce.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            With all my heart! Now, here's a bottle,<br/>
            Wherefrom, sometimes, I wet my throttle,<br/>
            Which, also, not the slightest, stinks;<br/>
            And willingly a glass I'll fill him.<br/>
               </p>
        (Whispering)
        <p>
            Yet, if this man without due preparation drinks,<br/>
            As well thou know'st, within an hour 'twill kill him.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            He is a friend of mine, with whom it will agree,<br/>
            And he deserves thy kitchen's best potation:<br/>
            Come, draw thy circle, speak thine adjuration,<br/>
            And fill thy goblet full and free!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
        (with fantastic gestures draws a circle and places mysterious articles therein;
            meanwhile the glasses begin to ring, the caldron to sound, and make a musical
            accompaniment. Finally she brings a great book, and stations in the circle the Apes, who
            are obliged to serve as reading-desk, and to hold the torches. She then beckons FAUST to
            approach.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (to MEPHISTOPHELES)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Now, what shall come of this? the creatures antic,<br/>
                The crazy stuff, the gestures frantic,—<br/>
                All the repulsive cheats I view,—<br/>
                Are known to me, and hated, too.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            O, nonsense! That's a thing for laughter;<br/>
            Don't be so terribly severe!<br/>
            She juggles you as doctor now, that, after,<br/>
            The beverage may work the proper cheer.<br/>
               </p>
        (He persuades FAUST to step into the circle.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
        (begins to declaim, with much emphasis, from the book)
        <p>
            See, thus it's done!<br/>
            Make ten of one,<br/>
            And two let be,<br/>
            Make even three,<br/>
            And rich thou 'It be.<br/>
            Cast o'er the four!<br/>
            From five and six<br/>
            (The witch's tricks)
            Make seven and eight,<br/>
            'Tis finished straight!<br/>
            And nine is one,<br/>
            And ten is none.<br/>
            This is the witch's once-one's-one!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">She talks like one who raves in fever.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Thou'lt hear much more before we leave her.<br/>
            'Tis all the same: the book I can repeat,<br/>
            Such time I've squandered o'er the history:<br/>
            A contradiction thus complete<br/>
            Is always for the wise, no less than fools, a mystery.<br/>
            The art is old and new, for verily<br/>
            All ages have been taught the matter,—<br/>
            By Three and One, and One and Three,<br/>
            Error instead of Truth to scatter.<br/>
            They prate and teach, and no one interferes;<br/>
            All from the fellowship of fools are shrinking.<br/>
            Man usually believes, if only words he hears,<br/>
            That also with them goes material for thinking!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
        (continues)
        <p>
            The lofty skill<br/>
            Of Science, still<br/>
            From all men deeply hidden!<br/>
            Who takes no thought,<br/>
            To him 'tis brought,<br/>
            'Tis given unsought, unbidden!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">What nonsense she declaims before us!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">
                My head is nigh to split, I fear:<br/>
                It seems to me as if I hear<br/>
                A hundred thousand fools in chorus.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            O Sibyl excellent, enough of adjuration!<br/>
            But hither bring us thy potation,<br/>
            And quickly fill the beaker to the brim!<br/>
            This drink will bring my friend no injuries:<br/>
            He is a man of manifold degrees,<br/>
            And many draughts are known to him.<br/>
               </p>
        (The WITCH, with many ceremonies, pours the drink into a cup; as FAUST sets it to his
            lips, a light flame arises.)
        <p>
            Down with it quickly! Drain it off!<br/>
            'Twill warm thy heart with new desire:<br/>
            Art with the Devil hand and glove,<br/>
            And wilt thou be afraid of fire?<br/>
               </p>
        (The WITCH breaks the circle: FAUST steps forth.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            And now, away! Thou dar'st not rest.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            And much good may the liquor do thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to the WITCH)
        <p>
            Thy wish be on Walpurgis Night expressed;<br/>
            What boon I have, shall then be given unto thee.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE WITCH</b>
               <p>
            Here is a song, which, if you sometimes sing,<br/>
            You'll find it of peculiar operation.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            Come, walk at once! A rapid occupation<br/>
            Must start the needful perspiration,<br/>
            And through thy frame the liquor's potence fling.<br/>
            The noble indolence I'll teach thee then to treasure,<br/>
            And soon thou'lt be aware, with keenest thrills of pleasure,<br/>
            How Cupid stirs and leaps, on light and restless wing.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">One rapid glance within the mirror give me,<br/>
                How beautiful that woman-form!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            No, no! The paragon of all, believe me,<br/>
            Thou soon shalt see, alive and warm.<br/>
               </p>
        (Aside)
        <p>
            Thou'lt find, this drink thy blood compelling,<br/>
            Each woman beautiful as Helen!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
