<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XXV</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>XXV. DUNGEON</h1>
               <hr/>
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (with a bunch of keys and a lamp, before an iron door)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">A shudder, long unfelt, comes o'er me;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Mankind's collected woe o'erwhelms me, here.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">She dwells within the dark, damp walls before me,<br/>
            And all her crime was a delusion dear!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">What! I delay to free her?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I dread, once again to see her?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">On! my shrinking but lingers Death more near.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He grasps the lock: the sound of singing is heard inside.)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">My mother, the harlot,<br/>
            Who put me to death;<br/>
            My father, the varlet,<br/>
            Who eaten me hath!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Little sister, so good,<br/>
            Laid my bones in the wood,<br/>
            In the damp moss and clay:<br/>
            Then was I a beautiful bird o' the wood;<br/>
            Fly away! Fly away!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (unlocking)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">She does not dream her lover listens near;<br/>
            That he the rattling chain, the rustling straw, can hear.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He enters.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (hiding herself on the pallet)
        <p>
            Woe! woe! They come. O death of bitterness!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (whispering)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Hush! hush! The hour is come that frees thee.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (throwing herself before him)
        <p>
            Art thou a man, then pity my distress!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thy cries will wake the guards, and they will seize thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He takes hold of the fetters to unlock them.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (on her knees)
        <p>
            Who, headsman! unto thee such power<br/>
            Over me could give?<br/>
            Thou'rt come for me at midnight-hour:<br/>
            Have mercy on me, let me live!<br/>
            Is't not soon enough when morning chime has run?<br/>
               </p>
        (She rises.)
        <p>
            And I am yet so young, so young!<br/>
            And now Death comes, and ruin!<br/>
            I, too, was fair, and that was my undoing.<br/>
            My love was near, but now he's far;<br/>
            Torn lies the wreath, scattered the blossoms are.<br/>
            Seize me not thus so violently!<br/>
            Spare me! What have I done to thee?<br/>
            Let me not vainly entreat thee!<br/>
            I never chanced, in all my days, to meet thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Shall I outlive this misery?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Now am I wholly in thy might.<br/>
            But let me suckle, first, my baby!<br/>
            I blissed it all this livelong night;<br/>
            They took 't away, to vex me, maybe,<br/>
            And now they say I killed the child outright.<br/>
            And never shall I be glad again.<br/>
            They sing songs about me! 'tis bad of the folk to do it!<br/>
            There's an old story has the same refrain;<br/>
            Who bade them so construe it?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (falling upon his knees)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Here lieth one who loves thee ever,<br/>
            The thraldom of thy woe to sever.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (flinging herself beside him)
        <p>
            O let us kneel, and call the Saints to hide us!<br/>
            Under the steps beside us,<br/>
            The threshold under,<br/>
            Hell heaves in thunder!<br/>
            The Evil One<br/>
            With terrible wrath<br/>
            Seeketh a path<br/>
            His prey to discover!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (aloud)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Margaret! Margaret!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (attentively listening)
        <p>
            That was the voice of my lover!<br/>
               </p>
        (She springs to her feet: the fetters fall off.)
        <p>
            Where is he? I heard him call me.<br/>
            I am free! No one shall enthrall me.<br/>
            To his neck will I fly,<br/>
            On his bosom lie!<br/>
            On the threshold he stood, and Margaret! calling,<br/>
            Midst of Hell's howling and noises appalling,<br/>
            Midst of the wrathful, infernal derision,<br/>
            I knew the sweet sound of the voice of the vision!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">'Tis I!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            'Tis thou! O, say it once again!<br/>
               </p>
        (Clasping him.)
        <p>
            'Tis he! 'tis he! Where now is all my pain?<br/>
            The anguish of the dungeon, and the chain?<br/>
            'Tis thou! Thou comest to save me,<br/>
            And I am saved!—<br/>
            Again the street I see<br/>
            Where first I looked on thee;<br/>
            And the garden, brightly blooming,<br/>
            Where I and Martha wait thy coming.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (struggling to leave)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Come! Come with me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Delay, now!<br/>
            So fain I stay, when thou delayest!<br/>
               </p>
        (Caressing him.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Away, now!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">If longer here thou stayest,<br/>
            We shall be made to dearly rue it.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Kiss me!—canst no longer do it?<br/>
            My friend, so short a time thou'rt missing,<br/>
            And hast unlearned thy kissing?<br/>
            Why is my heart so anxious, on thy breast?<br/>
            Where once a heaven thy glances did create me,<br/>
            A heaven thy loving words expressed,<br/>
            And thou didst kiss, as thou wouldst suffocate me—<br/>
            Kiss me!<br/>
            Or I'll kiss thee!<br/>
               </p>
        (She embraces him.)
        <p>
            Ah, woe! thy lips are chill,<br/>
            And still.<br/>
            How changed in fashion<br/>
            Thy passion!<br/>
            Who has done me this ill?<br/>
               </p>
        (She turns away from him.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Come, follow me! My darling, be more bold:<br/>
            I'll clasp thee, soon, with warmth a thousand-fold;<br/>
            But follow now! 'Tis all I beg of thee.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (turning to him)
        <p>
            And is it thou? Thou, surely, certainly?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">'Tis I! Come on!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Thou wilt unloose my chain,<br/>
            And in thy lap wilt take me once again.<br/>
            How comes it that thou dost not shrink from me?—<br/>
            Say, dost thou know, my friend, whom thou mak'st free?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Come! come! The night already vanisheth.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            My mother have I put to death;<br/>
            I've drowned the baby born to thee.<br/>
            Was it not given to thee and me?<br/>
            Thee, too!—'Tis thou! It scarcely true doth seem—<br/>
            Give me thy hand! 'Tis not a dream!<br/>
            Thy dear, dear hand!—But, ah, 'tis wet!<br/>
            Why, wipe it off! Methinks that yet<br/>
            There's blood thereon.<br/>
            Ah, God! what hast thou done?<br/>
            Nay, sheathe thy sword at last!<br/>
            Do not affray me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">O, let the past be past!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thy words will slay me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            No, no! Thou must outlive us.<br/>
            Now I'll tell thee the graves to give us:<br/>
            Thou must begin to-morrow<br/>
            The work of sorrow!<br/>
            The best place give to my mother,<br/>
            Then close at her side my brother,<br/>
            And me a little away,<br/>
            But not too very far, I pray!<br/>
            And here, on my right breast, my baby lay!<br/>
            Nobody else will lie beside me!—<br/>
            Ah, within thine arms to hide me,<br/>
            That was a sweet and a gracious bliss,<br/>
            But no more, no more can I attain it!<br/>
            I would force myself on thee and constrain it,<br/>
            And it seems thou repellest my kiss:<br/>
            And yet 'tis thou, so good, so kind to see!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">If thou feel'st it is I, then come with me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Out yonder?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">To freedom.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            If the grave is there,<br/>
            Death lying in wait, then come!<br/>
            From here to eternal rest:<br/>
            No further step—no, no!<br/>
            Thou goest away! O Henry, if I could go!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thou canst! Just will it! Open stands the door.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            I dare not go: there's no hope any more.<br/>
            Why should I fly? They'll still my steps waylay!<br/>
            It is so wretched, forced to beg my living,<br/>
            And a bad conscience sharper misery giving!<br/>
            It is so wretched, to be strange, forsaken,<br/>
            And I'd still be followed and taken!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">I'll stay with thee.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Be quick! Be quick!<br/>
            Save thy perishing child!<br/>
            Away! Follow the ridge<br/>
            Up by the brook,<br/>
            Over the bridge,<br/>
            Into the wood,<br/>
            To the left, where the plank is placed<br/>
            In the pool!<br/>
            Seize it in haste!<br/>
            'Tis trying to rise,<br/>
            'Tis struggling still!<br/>
            Save it! Save it!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Recall thy wandering will!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">One step, and thou art free at last!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            If the mountain we had only passed!<br/>
            There sits my mother upon a stone,—<br/>
            I feel an icy shiver!<br/>
            There sits my mother upon a stone,<br/>
            And her head is wagging ever.<br/>
            She beckons, she nods not, her heavy head falls o'er;<br/>
            She slept so long that she wakes no more.<br/>
            She slept, while we were caressing:<br/>
            Ah, those were the days of blessing!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly"> Here words and prayers are nothing worth;<br/>
            I'll venture, then, to bear thee forth.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            No—let me go! I'll suffer no force!<br/>
            Grasp me not so murderously!<br/>
            I've done, else, all things for the love of thee.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">The day dawns: Dearest! Dearest!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Day? Yes, the day comes,—the last day breaks for me!<br/>
            My wedding-day it was to be!<br/>
            Tell no one thou has been with Margaret!<br/>
            Woe for my garland! The chances<br/>
            Are over—'tis all in vain!<br/>
            We shall meet once again,<br/>
            But not at the dances!<br/>
            The crowd is thronging, no word is spoken:<br/>
            The square below<br/>
            And the streets overflow:<br/>
            The death-bell tolls, the wand is broken.<br/>
            I am seized, and bound, and delivered—<br/>
            Shoved to the block—they give the sign!<br/>
            Now over each neck has quivered<br/>
            The blade that is quivering over mine.<br/>
            Dumb lies the world like the grave!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">O had I ne'er been born!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (appears outside)
        <p>
            Off! or you're lost ere morn.<br/>
            Useless talking, delaying and praying!<br/>
            My horses are neighing:<br/>
            The morning twilight is near.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            What rises up from the threshold here?<br/>
            He! he! suffer him not!<br/>
            What does he want in this holy spot?<br/>
            He seeks me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thou shalt live.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Judgment of God! myself to thee I give.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            Come! or I'll leave her in the lurch, and thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Thine am I, Father! rescue me!<br/>
            Ye angels, holy cohorts, guard me,<br/>
            Camp around, and from evil ward me!<br/>
            Henry! I shudder to think of thee.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            She is judged!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (from above)
        <p>
            She is saved!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            Hither to me!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (He disappears with FAUST.)
    <br/>
               <b>VOICE</b>
        (from within, dying away)
        <p>
            Henry! Henry!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
