<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XIV</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>XIV. FOREST AND CAVERN</h1>
               <hr/>
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (solus)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Spirit sublime, thou gav'st me, gav'st me all<br/>
            For which I prayed. Not unto me in vain<br/>
            Hast thou thy countenance revealed in fire.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thou gav'st me Nature as a kingdom grand,<br/>
            With power to feel and to enjoy it. Thou<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Not only cold, amazed acquaintance yield'st,<br/>
            But grantest, that in her profoundest breast<br/>
            I gaze, as in the bosom of a friend.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The ranks of living creatures thou dost lead<br/>
            Before me, teaching me to know my brothers<br/>
            In air and water and the silent wood.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And when the storm in forests roars and grinds,<br/>
            The giant firs, in falling, neighbor boughs<br/>
            And neighbor trunks with crushing weight bear down,<br/>
            And falling, fill the hills with hollow thunders,—<br/>
            Then to the cave secure thou leadest me,<br/>
            Then show'st me mine own self, and in my breast<br/>
            The deep, mysterious miracles unfold.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine"> And when the perfect moon before my gaze<br/>
            Comes up with soothing light, around me float<br/>
            From every precipice and thicket damp<br/>
            The silvery phantoms of the ages past,<br/>
            And temper the austere delight of thought.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">That nothing can be perfect unto Man<br/>
            I now am conscious. With this ecstasy,<br/>
            Which brings me near and nearer to the Gods,<br/>
            Thou gav'st the comrade, whom I now no more<br/>
            Can do without, though, cold and scornful, he<br/>
            Demeans me to myself, and with a breath,<br/>
            A word, transforms thy gifts to nothingness.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Within my breast he fans a lawless fire,<br/>
            Unwearied, for that fair and lovely form:<br/>
            Thus in desire I hasten to enjoyment,<br/>
            And in enjoyment pine to feel desire.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (MEPHISTOPHELES enters.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Have you not led this life quite long enough?<br/>
            How can a further test delight you?<br/>
            'Tis very well, that once one tries the stuff,<br/>
            But something new must then requite you.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Would there were other work for thee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">To plague my day auspicious thou returnest.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Well! I'll engage to let thee be:<br/>
            Thou darest not tell me so in earnest.<br/>
            The loss of thee were truly very slight,—<br/>
            comrade crazy, rude, repelling:<br/>
            One has one's hands full all the day and night;<br/>
            If what one does, or leaves undone, is right,<br/>
            From such a face as thine there is no telling.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>

               <p>
                  <span class="divine">There is, again, thy proper tone!—<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">That thou hast bored me, I must thankful be!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Poor Son of Earth, how couldst thou thus alone<br/>
            Have led thy life, bereft of me?<br/>
            I, for a time, at least, have worked thy cure;<br/>
            Thy fancy's rickets plague thee not at all:<br/>
            Had I not been, so hadst thou, sure,<br/>
            Walked thyself off this earthly ball<br/>
            Why here to caverns, rocky hollows slinking,<br/>
            Sit'st thou, as 'twere an owl a-blinking?<br/>
            Why suck'st, from sodden moss and dripping stone,<br/>
            Toad-like, thy nourishment alone?<br/>
            A fine way, this, thy time to fill!<br/>
            The Doctor's in thy body still.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">What fresh and vital forces, canst thou guess,<br/>
            Spring from my commerce with the wilderness?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">But, if thou hadst the power of guessing,<br/>
            Thou wouldst be devil enough to grudge my soul the blessing.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            A blessing drawn from supernatural fountains!<br/>
            In night and dew to lie upon the mountains;<br/>
            All Heaven and Earth in rapture penetrating;<br/>
            Thyself to Godhood haughtily inflating;<br/>
            To grub with yearning force through Earth's dark marrow,<br/>
            Compress the six days' work within thy bosom narrow,—<br/>
            To taste, I know not what, in haughty power,<br/>
            Thine own ecstatic life on all things shower,<br/>
            Thine earthly self behind thee cast,<br/>
            And then the lofty instinct, thus—<br/>
               </p>
        (With a gesture:)
        <p>
            at last,—<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            I daren't say how—to pluck the final flower!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Shame on thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Yes, thou findest that unpleasant!<br/>
            Thou hast the moral right to cry me "shame!" at present.<br/>
            One dares not that before chaste ears declare,<br/>
            Which chaste hearts, notwithstanding, cannot spare;<br/>
            And, once for all, I grudge thee not the pleasure<br/>
            Of lying to thyself in moderate measure.<br/>
            But such a course thou wilt not long endure;<br/>
            Already art thou o'er-excited,<br/>
            And, if it last, wilt soon be plighted<br/>
            To madness and to horror, sure.<br/>
            Enough of that! Thy love sits lonely yonder,<br/>
            By all things saddened and oppressed;<br/>
            Her thoughts and yearnings seek thee, tenderer, fonder,—<br/>
            mighty love is in her breast.<br/>
            First came thy passion's flood and poured around her<br/>
            As when from melted snow a streamlet overflows;<br/>
            Thou hast therewith so filled and drowned her,<br/>
            That now thy stream all shallow shows.<br/>
            Methinks, instead of in the forests lording,<br/>
            The noble Sir should find it good,<br/>
            The love of this young silly blood<br/>
            At once to set about rewarding.<br/>
            Her time is miserably long;<br/>
            She haunts her window, watching clouds that stray<br/>
            O'er the old city-wall, and far away.<br/>
            "Were I a little bird!" so runs her song,<br/>
            Day long, and half night long.<br/>
            Now she is lively, mostly sad,<br/>
            Now, wept beyond her tears;<br/>
            Then again quiet she appears,—Always<br/>
            love-mad.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Serpent! Serpent!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (aside)
        <p>
            Ha! do I trap thee!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Get thee away with thine offences,<br/>
            Reprobate! Name not that fairest thing,<br/>
            Nor the desire for her sweet body bring<br/>
            Again before my half-distracted senses!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            What wouldst thou, then? She thinks that thou art flown;<br/>
            And half and half thou art, I own.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Yet am I near, and love keeps watch and ward;<br/>
            Though I were ne'er so far, it cannot falter:<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I envy even the Body of the Lord<br/>
            The touching of her lips, before the altar.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            'Tis very well! My envy oft reposes<br/>
            On your twin-pair, that feed among the roses.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Away, thou pimp!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            You rail, and it is fun to me.<br/>
            The God, who fashioned youth and maid,<br/>
            Perceived the noblest purpose of His trade,<br/>
            And also made their opportunity.<br/>
            Go on! It is a woe profound!<br/>
            'Tis for your sweetheart's room you're bound,<br/>
            And not for death, indeed.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">What are, within her arms, the heavenly blisses?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Though I be glowing with her kisses,<br/>
            Do I not always share her need?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I am the fugitive, all houseless roaming,<br/>
            The monster without air or rest,<br/>
            That like a cataract, down rocks and gorges foaming,<br/>
            Leaps, maddened, into the abyss's breast!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And side-wards she, with young unwakened senses,<br/>
            Within her cabin on the Alpine field<br/>
            Her simple, homely life commences,<br/>
            Her little world therein concealed.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And I, God's hate flung o'er me,<br/>
            Had not enough, to thrust<br/>
            The stubborn rocks before me<br/>
            And strike them into dust!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">She and her peace I yet must undermine:<br/>
            Thou, Hell, hast claimed this sacrifice as thine!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Help, Devil! through the coming pangs to push me;<br/>
            What must be, let it quickly be!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Let fall on me her fate, and also crush me,—<br/>
            One ruin whelm both her and me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Again it seethes, again it glows!<br/>
            Thou fool, go in and comfort her!<br/>
            When such a head as thine no outlet knows,<br/>
            It thinks the end must soon occur.<br/>
            Hail him, who keeps a steadfast mind!<br/>
            Thou, else, dost well the devil-nature wear:<br/>
            Naught so insipid in the world I find<br/>
            As is a devil in despair.<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
