<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene VIII</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>VIII. EVENING</h1>
               <hr/>
    A SMALL, NEATLY KEPT CHAMBER
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (plaiting and binding up the braids of her hair)
        <p>
            I'd something give, could I but say<br/>
            Who was that gentleman, to-day.<br/>
            Surely a gallant man was he,<br/>
            And of a noble family;<br/>
            And much could I in his face behold,—<br/>
            And he wouldn't, else, have been so bold!<br/>
               </p>
        [Exit
    
    MEPHISTOPHELES FAUST
    <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Come in, but gently: follow me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (after a moment's silence)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Leave me alone, I beg of thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (prying about)
        <p>
            Not every girl keeps things so neat.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (looking around)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">O welcome, twilight soft and sweet,<br/>
                That breathes throughout this hallowed shrine!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Sweet pain of love, bind thou with fetters fleet<br/>
                The heart that on the dew of hope must pine!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">How all around a sense impresses<br/>
                Of quiet, order, and content!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">This poverty what bounty blesses!<br/>
                What bliss within this narrow den is pent!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He throws himself into a leathern arm-chair near the bed.)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Receive me, thou, that in thine open arms<br/>
                Departed joy and pain wert wont to gather!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">How oft the children, with their ruddy charms,<br/>
                Hung here, around this throne, where sat the father!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Perchance my love, amid the childish band,<br/>
                Grateful for gifts the Holy Christmas gave her,<br/>
                Here meekly kissed the grandsire's withered hand.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I feel, O maid! thy very soul<br/>
                Of order and content around me whisper,—<br/>
                Which leads thee with its motherly control,<br/>
                The cloth upon thy board bids smoothly thee unroll,<br/>
                The sand beneath thy feet makes whiter, crisper.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">O dearest hand, to thee 'tis given<br/>
                To change this hut into a lower heaven!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And here!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He lifts one of the bed-curtains.)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">What sweetest thrill is in my blood!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Here could I spend whole hours, delaying:<br/>
                Here Nature shaped, as if in sportive playing,<br/>
                The angel blossom from the bud.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Here lay the child, with Life's warm essence<br/>
                The tender bosom filled and fair,<br/>
                And here was wrought, through holier, purer presence,<br/>
                The form diviner beings wear!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">And I? What drew me here with power?<br/>
                How deeply am I moved, this hour!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">What seek I? Why so full my heart, and sore?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Miserable Faust! I know thee now no more.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Is there a magic vapor here?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I came, with lust of instant pleasure,<br/>
                And lie dissolved in dreams of love's sweet leisure!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Are we the sport of every changeful atmosphere?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">And if, this moment, came she in to me,<br/>
                How would I for the fault atonement render!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">How small the giant lout would be,<br/>
                Prone at her feet, relaxed and tender!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Be quick! I see her there, returning.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Go! go! I never will retreat.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Here is a casket, not unmeet,<br/>
            Which elsewhere I have just been earning.<br/>
            Here, set it in the press, with haste!<br/>
            I swear, 'twill turn her head, to spy it:<br/>
            Some baubles I therein had placed,<br/>
            That you might win another by it.<br/>
            True, child is child, and play is play.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">I know not, should I do it?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Ask you, pray?<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            Yourself, perhaps, would keep the bubble?<br/>
            Then I suggest, 'twere fair and just<br/>
            To spare the lovely day your lust,<br/>
            And spare to me the further trouble.<br/>
            You are not miserly, I trust?<br/>
            I rub my hands, in expectation tender—<br/>
               </p>
        (He places the casket in the press, and locks it again.)
        <p>
            Now quick, away!<br/>
            The sweet young maiden to betray,<br/>
            So that by wish and will you bend her;<br/>
            And you look as though<br/>
            To the lecture-hall you were forced to go,—<br/>
            As if stood before you, gray and loath,<br/>
            Physics and Metaphysics both!<br/>
            But away!<br/>
               </p>
        [Exeunt.
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (with a lamp)
        <p>
            It is so close, so sultry, here!<br/>
               </p>
        (She opens the window)
        <p>
            And yet 'tis not so warm outside.<br/>
            I feel, I know not why, such fear!—<br/>
            Would mother came!—where can she bide?<br/>
            My body's chill and shuddering,—<br/>
            I'm but a silly, fearsome thing!<br/>
               </p>
        (She begins to sing while undressing)
        <p>
            There was a King in Thule,<br/>
            Was faithful till the grave,—<br/>
            To whom his mistress, dying,<br/>
            A golden goblet gave.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            Naught was to him more precious;<br/>
            He drained it at every bout:<br/>
            His eyes with tears ran over,<br/>
            As oft as he drank thereout.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            When came his time of dying,<br/>
            The towns in his land he told,<br/>
            Naught else to his heir denying<br/>
            Except the goblet of gold.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            He sat at the royal banquet<br/>
            With his knights of high degree,<br/>
            In the lofty hall of his fathers<br/>
            In the Castle by the Sea.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            There stood the old carouser,<br/>
            And drank the last life-glow;<br/>
            And hurled the hallowed goblet<br/>
            Into the tide below.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            He saw it plunging and filling,<br/>
            And sinking deep in the sea:<br/>
            Then fell his eyelids forever,<br/>
            And never more drank he!<br/>
               </p>
        (She opens the press in order to arrange her clothes, and perceives the casket of
            jewels.)
        <p>
            How comes that lovely casket here to me?<br/>
            I locked the press, most certainly.<br/>
            'Tis truly wonderful! What can within it be?<br/>
            Perhaps 'twas brought by some one as a pawn,<br/>
            And mother gave a loan thereon?<br/>
            And here there hangs a key to fit:<br/>
            I have a mind to open it.<br/>
            What is that? God in Heaven! Whence came<br/>
            Such things? Never beheld I aught so fair!<br/>
            Rich ornaments, such as a noble dame<br/>
            On highest holidays might wear!<br/>
            How would the pearl-chain suit my hair?<br/>
            Ah, who may all this splendor own?<br/>
               </p>
        (She adorns herself with the jewelry, and steps before the mirror.)
        <p>
            Were but the ear-rings mine, alone!<br/>
            One has at once another air.<br/>
            What helps one's beauty, youthful blood?<br/>
            One may possess them, well and good;<br/>
            But none the more do others care.<br/>
            They praise us half in pity, sure:<br/>
            To gold still tends,<br/>
            On gold depends<br/>
            All, all! Alas, we poor!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
