<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene I</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>I. NIGHT</h1>
               <hr/>
    (A lofty-arched, narrow, Gothic chamber. FAUST, in a chair at his desk,
        restless.)
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">I've studied now Philosophy<br/>
            And Jurisprudence, Medicine,—<br/>
            And even, alas! Theology,—<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">From end to end, with labor keen;<br/>
            And here, poor fool! with all my lore<br/>
            I stand, no wiser than before:<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I'm Magister—yea, Doctor—hight,<br/>
            And straight or cross-wise, wrong or right,<br/>
            These ten years long, with many woes,<br/>
            I've led my scholars by the nose,—<br/>
            And see, that nothing can be known!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">That knowledge cuts me to the bone.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I'm cleverer, true, than those fops of teachers,<br/>
            Doctors and Magisters, Scribes and Preachers;<br/>
            Neither scruples nor doubts come now to smite me,<br/>
            Nor Hell nor Devil can longer affright me.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">For this, all pleasure am I foregoing;<br/>
            I do not pretend to aught worth knowing,<br/>
            I do not pretend I could be a teacher<br/>
            To help or convert a fellow-creature.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Then, too, I've neither lands nor gold,<br/>
            Nor the world's least pomp or honor hold—<br/>
            No dog would endure such a curst existence!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Wherefore, from Magic I seek assistance,<br/>
            That many a secret perchance I reach<br/>
            Through spirit-power and spirit-speech,<br/>
            And thus the bitter task forego<br/>
            Of saying the things I do not know,—<br/>
            That I may detect the inmost force<br/>
            Which binds the world, and guides its course;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Its germs, productive powers explore,<br/>
            And rummage in empty words no more!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">O full and splendid Moon, whom I<br/>
            Have, from this desk, seen climb the sky<br/>
            So many a midnight,—would thy glow<br/>
            For the last time beheld my woe!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Ever thine eye, most mournful friend,<br/>
            O'er books and papers saw me bend;<br/>
            But would that I, on mountains grand,<br/>
            Amid thy blessed light could stand,<br/>
            With spirits through mountain-caverns hover,<br/>
            Float in thy twilight the meadows over,<br/>
            And, freed from the fumes of lore that swathe me,<br/>
            To health in thy dewy fountains bathe me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Ah, me! this dungeon still I see.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">This drear, accursed masonry,<br/>
            Where even the welcome daylight strains<br/>
            But duskly through the painted panes.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Hemmed in by many a toppling heap<br/>
            Of books worm-eaten, gray with dust,<br/>
            Which to the vaulted ceiling creep,<br/>
            Against the smoky paper thrust,—<br/>
            With glasses, boxes, round me stacked,<br/>
            And instruments together hurled,<br/>
            Ancestral lumber, stuffed and packed—<br/>
            Such is my world: and what a world!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">And do I ask, wherefore my heart<br/>
            Falters, oppressed with unknown needs?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Why some inexplicable smart<br/>
            All movement of my life impedes?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Alas! in living Nature's stead,<br/>
            Where God His human creature set,<br/>
            In smoke and mould the fleshless dead<br/>
            And bones of beasts surround me yet!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Fly! Up, and seek the broad, free land!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">And this one Book of Mystery<br/>
            From Nostradamus' very hand,<br/>
            Is't not sufficient company?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">When I the starry courses know,<br/>
            And Nature's wise instruction seek,<br/>
            With light of power my soul shall glow,<br/>
            As when to spirits spirits speak.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Tis vain, this empty brooding here,<br/>
            Though guessed the holy symbols be:<br/>
            Ye, Spirits, come—ye hover near—<br/>
            Oh, if you hear me, answer me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He opens the Book, and perceives the sign of the Macrocosm.)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Ha! what a sudden rapture leaps from this<br/>
            I view, through all my senses swiftly flowing!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I feel a youthful, holy, vital bliss<br/>
            In every vein and fibre newly glowing.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Was it a God, who traced this sign,<br/>
            With calm across my tumult stealing,<br/>
            My troubled heart to joy unsealing,<br/>
            With impulse, mystic and divine,<br/>
            The powers of Nature here, around my path, revealing?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Am I a God?—so clear mine eyes!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">In these pure features I behold<br/>
            Creative Nature to my soul unfold.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">What says the sage, now first I recognize:<br/>
            "The spirit-world no closures fasten;<br/>
            Thy sense is shut, thy heart is dead:<br/>
            Disciple, up! untiring, hasten<br/>
            To bathe thy breast in morning-red!"<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He contemplates the sign.)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">How each the Whole its substance gives,<br/>
            Each in the other works and lives!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Like heavenly forces rising and descending,<br/>
            Their golden urns reciprocally lending,<br/>
            With wings that winnow blessing<br/>
            From Heaven through Earth I see them pressing,<br/>
            Filling the All with harmony unceasing!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">How grand a show! but, ah! a show alone.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Thee, boundless Nature, how make thee my own?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Where you, ye beasts? Founts of all Being, shining,<br/>
            Whereon hang Heaven's and Earth's desire,<br/>
            Whereto our withered hearts aspire,—<br/>
            Ye flow, ye feed: and am I vainly pining?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He turns the leaves impatiently, and perceives the sign of the
            Earth-Spirit.)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">How otherwise upon me works this sign!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thou, Spirit of the Earth, art nearer:<br/>
            Even now my powers are loftier, clearer;<br/>
            I glow, as drunk with new-made wine:<br/>
            New strength and heart to meet the world incite me,<br/>
            The woe of earth, the bliss of earth, invite me,<br/>
            And though the shock of storms may smite me,<br/>
            No crash of shipwreck shall have power to fright me!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Clouds gather over me—<br/>
            The moon conceals her light—<br/>
            The lamp's extinguished!—<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Mists rise,—red, angry rays are darting<br/>
            Around my head!—There falls<br/>
            A horror from the vaulted roof,<br/>
            And seizes me!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I feel thy presence, Spirit I invoke!<br/>
            Reveal thyself!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Ha! in my heart what rending stroke!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">With new impulsion<br/>
            My senses heave in this convulsion!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I feel thee draw my heart, absorb, exhaust me:<br/>
            Thou must! thou must! and though my life it cost me!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (He seizes the book, and mysteriously pronounces the sign of the Spirit. A ruddy flame flashes: the Spirit appears in the flame.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>SPIRIT</b>
               <p>
            Who calls me?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (with averted head)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Terrible to see!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRIT</b>
               <p>
            Me hast thou long with might attracted,<br/>
            Long from my sphere thy food exacted,<br/>
            And now—<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Woe! I endure not thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRIT</b>
               <p>
            To view me is thine aspiration,<br/>
            My voice to hear, my countenance to see;<br/>
            Thy powerful yearning moveth me,<br/>
            Here am I!—what mean perturbation<br/>
            Thee, superhuman, shakes? Thy soul's high calling, where?<br/>
            Where is the breast, which from itself a world did bear,<br/>
            And shaped and cherished—which with joy expanded,<br/>
            To be our peer, with us, the Spirits, banded?<br/>
            Where art thou, Faust, whose voice has pierced to me,<br/>
            Who towards me pressed with all thine energy?<br/>
            He art thou, who, my presence breathing, seeing,<br/>
            Trembles through all the depths of being,<br/>
            A writhing worm, a terror-stricken form?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thee, form of flame, shall I then fear?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yes, I am Faust: I am thy peer!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRIT</b>
               <p>
            In the tides of Life, in Action's storm,<br/>
            A fluctuant wave,<br/>
            A shuttle free,<br/>
            Birth and the Grave,<br/>
            An eternal sea,<br/>
            A weaving, flowing<br/>
            Life, all-glowing,<br/>
            Thus at Time's humming loom 'tis my hand prepares<br/>
            The garment of Life which the Deity wears!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Thou, who around the wide world wendest,<br/>
            Thou busy Spirit, how near I feel to thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SPIRIT</b>
               <p>
            Thou'rt like the Spirit which thou comprehendest,<br/>
            Not me!<br/>
               </p>
        (Disappears.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (overwhelmed)
        <p>
                  <span class="divine">Not thee!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Whom then?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I, image of the Godhead!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Not even like thee!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (A knock.)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">O Death!—I know it—'tis my Famulus!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">My fairest luck finds no fruition:<br/>
            In all the fullness of my vision<br/>
            The soulless sneak disturbs me thus!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
        (Enter WAGNER, in dressing-gown and night-cap, a lamp in his hand. FAUST turns
            impatiently.)
    
    <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Pardon, I heard your declamation;<br/>
            'Twas sure an old Greek tragedy you read?<br/>
            In such an art I crave some preparation,<br/>
            Since now it stands one in good stead.<br/>
            I've often heard it said, a preacher<br/>
            Might learn, with a comedian for a teacher.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Yes, when the priest comedian is by nature,<br/>
            As haply now and then the case may be.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Ah, when one studies thus, a prisoned creature,<br/>
            That scarce the world on holidays can see,—<br/>
            Scarce through a glass, by rare occasion,<br/>
            How shall one lead it by persuasion?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">You'll ne'er attain it, save you know the feeling,<br/>
            Save from the soul it rises clear,<br/>
            Serene in primal strength, compelling<br/>
            The hearts and minds of all who hear.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">You sit forever gluing, patching;<br/>
            You cook the scraps from others' fare;<br/>
            And from your heap of ashes hatching<br/>
            A starveling flame, ye blow it bare!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Take children's, monkeys' gaze admiring,<br/>
            If such your taste, and be content;<br/>
            But ne'er from heart to heart you'll speak inspiring,<br/>
            Save your own heart is eloquent!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Yet through delivery orators succeed;<br/>
            I feel that I am far behind, indeed.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Seek thou the honest recompense!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Beware, a tinkling fool to be!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">With little art, clear wit and sense<br/>
            Suggest their own delivery;<br/>
            And if thou'rt moved to speak in earnest,<br/>
            What need, that after words thou yearnest?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yes, your discourses, with their glittering show,<br/>
            Where ye for men twist shredded thought like paper,<br/>
            Are unrefreshing as the winds that blow<br/>
            The rustling leaves through chill autumnal vapor!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Ah, God! but Art is long,<br/>
            And Life, alas! is fleeting.<br/>
            And oft, with zeal my critic-duties meeting,<br/>
            In head and breast there's something wrong.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            How hard it is to compass the assistance<br/>
            Whereby one rises to the source!<br/>
            And, haply, ere one travels half the course<br/>
            Must the poor devil quit existence.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Is parchment, then, the holy fount before thee,<br/>
            A draught wherefrom thy thirst forever slakes?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">No true refreshment can restore thee,<br/>
            Save what from thine own soul spontaneous breaks.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Pardon! a great delight is granted<br/>
            When, in the spirit of the ages planted,<br/>
            We mark how, ere our times, a sage has thought,<br/>
            And then, how far his work, and grandly, we have brought.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">O yes, up to the stars at last!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Listen, my friend: the ages that are past<br/>
            Are now a book with seven seals protected:<br/>
            What you the Spirit of the Ages call<br/>
            Is nothing but the spirit of you all,<br/>
            Wherein the Ages are reflected.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">So, oftentimes, you miserably mar it!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">At the first glance who sees it runs away.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">An offal-barrel and a lumber-garret,<br/>
            Or, at the best, a Punch-and-Judy play,<br/>
            With maxims most pragmatical and hitting,<br/>
            As in the mouths of puppets are befitting!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            But then, the world—the human heart and brain!<br/>
            Of these one covets some slight apprehension.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Yes, of the kind which men attain!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Who dares the child's true name in public mention?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The few, who thereof something really learned,<br/>
            Unwisely frank, with hearts that spurned concealing,<br/>
            And to the mob laid bare each thought and feeling,<br/>
            Have evermore been crucified and burned.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">I pray you, Friend, 'tis now the dead of night;<br/>
            Our converse here must be suspended.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            I would have shared your watches with delight,<br/>
            That so our learned talk might be extended.<br/>
            To-morrow, though, I'll ask, in Easter leisure,<br/>
            This and the other question, at your pleasure.<br/>
            Most zealously I seek for erudition:<br/>
            Much do I know—but to know all is my ambition.<br/>
               </p>
        [Exit.
    
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
        (solus)
        <p>
                  <span class="earthly">That brain, alone, not loses hope, whose choice is<br/>
            To stick in shallow trash forevermore,—<br/>
            Which digs with eager hand for buried ore,<br/>
            And, when it finds an angle-worm, rejoices!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Dare such a human voice disturb the flow,<br/>
            Around me here, of spirit-presence fullest?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And yet, this once my thanks I owe<br/>
            To thee, of all earth's sons the poorest, dullest!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">For thou hast torn me from that desperate state<br/>
            Which threatened soon to overwhelm my senses:<br/>
            The apparition was so giant-great,<br/>
            It dwarfed and withered all my soul's pretences!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">I, image of the Godhead, who began—<br/>
            Deeming Eternal Truth secure in nearness—<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Ye choirs, have ye begun the sweet, consoling chant,<br/>
            Which, through the night of Death, the angels ministrant<br/>
            Sang, God's new Covenant repeating?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS OF WOMEN</b>
               <p>
            With spices and precious<br/>
            Balm, we arrayed him;<br/>
            Faithful and gracious,<br/>
            We tenderly laid him:<br/>
            Linen to bind him<br/>
            Cleanlily wound we:<br/>
            Ah! when we would find him,<br/>
            Christ no more found we!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS OF ANGELS</b>
               <p>
            Christ is ascended!<br/>
            Bliss hath invested him,—<br/>
            Woes that molested him,<br/>
            Trials that tested him,<br/>
            Gloriously ended!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Why, here in dust, entice me with your spell,<br/>
            Ye gentle, powerful sounds of Heaven?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Peal rather there, where tender natures dwell.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Your messages I hear, but faith has not been given;<br/>
            The dearest child of Faith is Miracle.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I venture not to soar to yonder regions<br/>
            Whence the glad tidings hither float;<br/>
            And yet, from childhood up familiar with the note,<br/>
            To Life it now renews the old allegiance.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Once Heavenly Love sent down a burning kiss<br/>
            Upon my brow, in Sabbath silence holy;<br/>
            And, filled with mystic presage, chimed the church-bell slowly,<br/>
            And prayer dissolved me in a fervent bliss.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">A sweet, uncomprehended yearning<br/>
            Drove forth my feet through woods and meadows free,<br/>
            And while a thousand tears were burning,<br/>
            I felt a world arise for me.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">These chants, to youth and all its sports appealing,<br/>
            Proclaimed the Spring's rejoicing holiday;<br/>
            And Memory holds me now, with childish feeling,<br/>
            Back from the last, the solemn way.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Sound on, ye hymns of Heaven, so sweet and mild!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">My tears gush forth: the Earth takes back her child!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS OF DISCIPLES</b>
               <p>
            Has He, victoriously,<br/>
            Burst from the vaulted<br/>
            Grave, and all-gloriously<br/>
            Now sits exalted?<br/>
            Is He, in glow of birth,<br/>
            Rapture creative near?<br/>
            Ah! to the woe of earth<br/>
            Still are we native here.<br/>
            We, his aspiring<br/>
            Followers, Him we miss;<br/>
            Weeping, desiring,<br/>
            Master, Thy bliss!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CHORUS OF ANGELS</b>
               <p>
            Christ is arisen,<br/>
            Out of Corruption's womb:<br/>
            Burst ye the prison,<br/>
            Break from your gloom!<br/>
            Praising and pleading him,<br/>
            Lovingly needing him,<br/>
            Brotherly feeding him,<br/>
            Preaching and speeding him,<br/>
            Blessing, succeeding Him,<br/>
            Thus is the Master near,—<br/>
            Thus is He here!<br/>
               </p>
    
            </section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
