<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene XIX</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>XIX. NIGHT</h1>
               <hr/>
    STREET BEFORE MARGARET'S DOOR 
    <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
        (a soldier, MARGARET'S brother)
        <p>
            When I have sat at some carouse.<br/>
            Where each to each his brag allows,<br/>
            And many a comrade praised to me<br/>
            His pink of girls right lustily,<br/>
            With brimming glass that spilled the toast,<br/>
            And elbows planted as in boast:<br/>
            I sat in unconcerned repose,<br/>
            And heard the swagger as it rose.<br/>
            And stroking then my beard, I'd say,<br/>
            Smiling, the bumper in my hand:<br/>
            "Each well enough in her own way.<br/>
            But is there one in all the land<br/>
            Like sister Margaret, good as gold,—<br/>
            One that to her can a candle hold?"<br/>
            Cling! clang! "Here's to her!" went around<br/>
            The board: "He speaks the truth!" cried some;<br/>
            "In her the flower o' the sex is found!"<br/>
            And all the swaggerers were dumb.<br/>
            And now!—I could tear my hair with vexation.<br/>
            And dash out my brains in desperation!<br/>
            With turned-up nose each scamp may face me,<br/>
            With sneers and stinging taunts disgrace me,<br/>
            And, like a bankrupt debtor sitting,<br/>
            A chance-dropped word may set me sweating!<br/>
            Yet, though I thresh them all together,<br/>
            I cannot call them liars, either.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            But what comes sneaking, there, to view?<br/>
            If I mistake not, there are two.<br/>
            If he's one, let me at him drive!<br/>
            He shall not leave the spot alive.<br/>
               </p>
    
        FAUST MEPHISTOPHELES
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">How from the window of the sacristy<br/>
                Upward th'eternal lamp sends forth a glimmer,<br/>
                That, lessening side-wards, fainter grows and dimmer,<br/>
                Till darkness closes from the sky!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">The shadows thus within my bosom gather.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I'm like a sentimental tom-cat, rather,<br/>
            That round the tall fire-ladders sweeps,<br/>
            And stealthy, then, along the coping creeps:<br/>
            Quite virtuous, withal, I come,<br/>
            A little thievish and a little frolicsome.<br/>
            I feel in every limb the presage<br/>
            Forerunning the grand Walpurgis-Night:<br/>
            Day after to-morrow brings its message,<br/>
            And one keeps watch then with delight.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Meanwhile, may not the treasure risen be,<br/>
                Which there, behind, I glimmering see?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Shalt soon experience the pleasure,<br/>
            To lift the kettle with its treasure.<br/>
            I lately gave therein a squint—<br/>
            Saw splendid lion-dollars in 't.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Not even a jewel, not a ring,<br/>
                To deck therewith my darling girl?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            I saw, among the rest, a thing<br/>
            That seemed to be a chain of pearl.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">That's well, indeed! For painful is it<br/>
                To bring no gift when her I visit.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Thou shouldst not find it so annoying,<br/>
            Without return to be enjoying.<br/>
            Now, while the sky leads forth its starry throng,<br/>
            Thou'lt hear a masterpiece, no work completer:<br/>
            I'll sing her, first, a moral song,<br/>
            The surer, afterwards, to cheat her.<br/>
               </p>
        (Sings to the cither.)
        <p>
            What dost thou here<br/>
            In daybreak clear,<br/>
            Kathrina dear,<br/>
            Before thy lover's door?<br/>
            Beware! the blade<br/>
            Lets in a maid.<br/>
            That out a maid<br/>
            Departeth nevermore!<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            The coaxing shun<br/>
            Of such an one!<br/>
            When once 'tis done<br/>
            Good-night to thee, poor thing!<br/>
            Love's time is brief:<br/>
            Unto no thief<br/>
            Be warm and lief,<br/>
            But with the wedding-ring!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
        (comes forward)
        <p>
            Whom wilt thou lure? God's-element!<br/>
            Rat-catching piper, thou!—perdition!<br/>
            To the Devil, first, the instrument!<br/>
            To the Devil, then, the curst musician!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            The cither's smashed! For nothing more 'tis fitting.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            There's yet a skull I must be splitting!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            Sir Doctor, don't retreat, I pray!<br/>
            Stand by: I'll lead, if you'll but tarry:<br/>
            Out with your spit, without delay!<br/>
            You've but to lunge, and I will parry.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            Then parry that!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Why not? 'tis light.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            That, too!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Of course.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            I think the Devil must fight!<br/>
            How is it, then? my hand's already lame:<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
        (to FAUST)
        <p>
            Thrust home!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
        (jails)
        <p>
            O God!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MEPHISTOPHELES</b>
               <p>
            Now is the lubber tame!<br/>
            But come, away! 'Tis time for us to fly;<br/>
            For there arises now a murderous cry.<br/>
            With the police 'twere easy to compound it,<br/>
            But here the penal court will sift and sound it.<br/>
               </p>
        [Exit with FAUST]
    
    <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
        (at the window)
        <p>
            Come out! Come out!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (at the window)
        <p>
            Quick, bring a light!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
        (as above)
        <p>
            They swear and storm, they yell and fight!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PEOPLE</b>
               <p>
            Here lies one dead already—see!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
        (coming from the house)
        <p>
            The murderers, whither have they run?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
        (coming out)
        <p>
            Who lies here?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PEOPLE</b>
               <p>
            'Tis thy mother's son!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            Almighty God! what misery!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            I'm dying! That is quickly said,<br/>
            And quicker yet 'tis done.<br/>
            Why howl, you women there? Instead,<br/>
            Come here and listen, every one!<br/>
               </p>
        (All gather around him)
        <p>
            My Margaret, see! still young thou art,<br/>
            But not the least bit shrewd or smart,<br/>
            Thy business thus to slight:<br/>
            So this advice I bid thee heed—<br/>
            Now that thou art a whore indeed,<br/>
            Why, be one then, outright!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            My brother! God! such words to me?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            In this game let our Lord God be!<br/>
            What's done's already done, alas!<br/>
            What follows it, must come to pass.<br/>
            With one begin'st thou secretly,<br/>
            Then soon will others come to thee,<br/>
            And when a dozen thee have known,<br/>
            Thou'rt also free to all the town.<br/>
            When Shame is born and first appears,<br/>
            She is in secret brought to light,<br/>
            And then they draw the veil of night<br/>
            Over her head and ears;<br/>
            Her life, in fact, they're loath to spare her.<br/>
            But let her growth and strength display,<br/>
            She walks abroad unveiled by day,<br/>
            Yet is not grown a whit the fairer.<br/>
            The uglier she is to sight,<br/>
            The more she seeks the day's broad light.<br/>
            The time I verily can discern<br/>
            When all the honest folk will turn<br/>
            From thee, thou jade! and seek protection<br/>
            As from a corpse that breeds infection.<br/>
            Thy guilty heart shall then dismay thee.<br/>
            When they but look thee in the face:—<br/>
            Shalt not in a golden chain array thee,<br/>
            Nor at the altar take thy place!<br/>
            Shalt not, in lace and ribbons flowing,<br/>
            Make merry when the dance is going!<br/>
            But in some corner, woe betide thee!<br/>
            Among the beggars and cripples hide thee;<br/>
            And so, though even God forgive,<br/>
            On earth a damned existence live!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARTHA</b>
               <p>
            Commend your soul to God for pardon,<br/>
            That you your heart with slander harden!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            Thou pimp most infamous, be still!<br/>
            Could I thy withered body kill,<br/>
            'Twould bring, for all my sinful pleasure,<br/>
            Forgiveness in the richest measure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>MARGARET</b>
               <p>
            My brother! This is Hell's own pain!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>VALENTINE</b>
               <p>
            I tell thee, from thy tears refrain!<br/>
            When thou from honor didst depart<br/>
            It stabbed me to the very heart.<br/>
            Now through the slumber of the grave<br/>
            I go to God as a soldier brave.<br/>
               </p>
        (Dies.)
    
</section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
