<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Scene II</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="faust.css"/>
      <script src="script.js"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="container">
         <h1>Faust's Two Souls</h1>
         <div class="flex-grid">
            <aside class="col sidebar">
               <a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
               <a href="about.xhtml">About</a>
               <a href="scenes.xhtml">Scene Index</a>
               <a href="project_log.xhtml">Project Log</a>
               <a href="graphs.xhtml">Graphs</a>
               <a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusion</a>
               <a href="resources.xhtml">Resources</a>
               <hr/>
               <h3 style="text-align: center;">Two Souls</h3>
               <hr/>
               <p>
                  <label for="divine">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="divine"/>divine</label>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <label for="earthly">
                     <input type="checkbox" id="earthly"/>earthly</label>
               </p>
            </aside>
            <section class="col script">
               <h1>II. BEFORE THE CITY-GATE</h1>
               <hr/>
    (Pedestrians of all kinds come forth.)
    <br/>
               <b>SEVERAL APPRENTICES</b>
               <p>
            Why do you go that way?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>OTHERS</b>
               <p>
            We're for the Hunters' lodge, to-day.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE FIRST</b>
               <p>
            We'll saunter to the Mill, in yonder hollow.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>AN APPRENTICE</b>
               <p>
            Go to the River Tavern, I should say.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SECOND APPRENTICE</b>
               <p>
            But then, it's not a pleasant way.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE OTHERS</b>
               <p>
            And what will you?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A THIRD</b>
               <p>
            As goes the crowd, I follow.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A FOURTH</b>
               <p>
            Come up to Burgdorf? There you'll find good cheer,<br/>
            The finest lasses and the best of beer,<br/>
            And jolly rows and squabbles, trust me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A FIFTH</b>
               <p>
            You swaggering fellow, is your hide<br/>
            A third time itching to be tried?<br/>
            I won't go there, your jolly rows disgust me!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SERVANT-GIRL</b>
               <p>
            No,—no! I'll turn and go to town again.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ANOTHER</b>
               <p>
            We'll surely find him by those poplars yonder.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE FIRST</b>
               <p>
            That's no great luck for me, 'tis plain.<br/>
            You'll have him, when and where you wander:<br/>
            His partner in the dance you'll be,—<br/>
            But what is all your fun to me?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE OTHER</b>
               <p>
            He's surely not alone to-day:<br/>
            He'll be with Curly-head, I heard him say.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>A STUDENT</b>
               <p>
            Deuce! how they step, the buxom wenches!<br/>
            Come, Brother! we must see them to the benches.<br/>
            A strong, old beer, a pipe that stings and bites,<br/>
            A girl in Sunday clothes,—these three are my delights.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CITIZEN'S DAUGHTER</b>
               <p>
            Just see those handsome fellows, there!<br/>
            It's really shameful, I declare;—<br/>
            To follow servant-girls, when they<br/>
            Might have the most genteel society to-day!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SECOND STUDENT</b>
        (to the First)
        <p>
            Not quite so fast! Two others come behind,—<br/>
            Those, dressed so prettily and neatly.<br/>
            My neighbor's one of them, I find,<br/>
            A girl that takes my heart, completely.<br/>
            They go their way with looks demure,<br/>
            But they'll accept us, after all, I'm sure.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE FIRST</b>
               <p>
            No, Brother! not for me their formal ways.<br/>
            Quick! lest our game escape us in the press:<br/>
            The hand that wields the broom on Saturdays<br/>
            Will best, on Sundays, fondle and caress.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CITIZEN</b>
               <p>
            He suits me not at all, our new-made Burgomaster!<br/>
            Since he's installed, his arrogance grows faster.<br/>
            How has he helped the town, I say?<br/>
            Things worsen,—what improvement names he?<br/>
            Obedience, more than ever, claims he,<br/>
            And more than ever we must pay!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>BEGGAR</b>
        (sings)
        <p>
            Good gentlemen and lovely ladies,<br/>
            So red of cheek and fine of dress,<br/>
            Behold, how needful here your aid is,<br/>
            And see and lighten my distress!<br/>
            Let me not vainly sing my ditty;<br/>
            He's only glad who gives away:<br/>
            A holiday, that shows your pity,<br/>
            Shall be for me a harvest-day!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ANOTHER CITIZEN</b>
               <p>
            On Sundays, holidays, there's naught I take delight in,<br/>
            Like gossiping of war, and war's array,<br/>
            When down in Turkey, far away,<br/>
            The foreign people are a-fighting.<br/>
            One at the window sits, with glass and friends,<br/>
            And sees all sorts of ships go down the river gliding:<br/>
            And blesses then, as home he wends<br/>
            At night, our times of peace abiding.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THIRD CITIZEN</b>
               <p>
            Yes, Neighbor! that's my notion, too:<br/>
            Why, let them break their heads, let loose their passions,<br/>
            And mix things madly through and through,<br/>
            So, here, we keep our good old fashions!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>OLD WOMAN</b>
        (to the Citizen's Daughter)
        <p>
            Dear me, how fine! So handsome, and so young!<br/>
            Who wouldn't lose his heart, that met you?<br/>
            Don't be so proud! I'll hold my tongue,<br/>
            And what you'd like I'll undertake to get you.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>CITIZEN'S DAUGHTER</b>
               <p>
            Come, Agatha! I shun the witch's sight<br/>
            Before folks, lest there be misgiving:<br/>
            'Tis true, she showed me, on Saint Andrew's Night,<br/>
            My future sweetheart, just as he were living.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>THE OTHER</b>
               <p>
            She showed me mine, in crystal clear,<br/>
            With several wild young blades, a soldier-lover:<br/>
            I seek him everywhere, I pry and peer,<br/>
            And yet, somehow, his face I can't discover.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>SOLDIERS</b>
               <p>
            Castles, with lofty<br/>
            Ramparts and towers,<br/>
            Maidens disdainful<br/>
            In Beauty's array,<br/>
            Both shall be ours!<br/>
            Bold is the venture,<br/>
            Splendid the pay!<br/>
            Lads, let the trumpets<br/>
            For us be suing,—<br/>
            Calling to pleasure,<br/>
            Calling to ruin.<br/>
            Stormy our life is;<br/>
            Such is its boon!<br/>
            Maidens and castles<br/>
            Capitulate soon.<br/>
            Bold is the venture,<br/>
            Splendid the pay!<br/>
            And the soldiers go marching,<br/>
            Marching away!<br/>
               </p>
    
    FAUST AND WAGNER
    <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Released from ice are brook and river<br/>
                By the quickening glance of the gracious Spring;<br/>
                The colors of hope to the valley cling,<br/>
                And weak old Winter himself must shiver,<br/>
                Withdrawn to the mountains, a crownless king:<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Whence, ever retreating, he sends again<br/>
                Impotent showers of sleet that darkle<br/>
                In belts across the green o' the plain.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">But the sun will permit no white to sparkle;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Everywhere form in development moveth;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">He will brighten the world with the tints he loveth,<br/>
                And, lacking blossoms, blue, yellow, and red,<br/>
                He takes these gaudy people instead.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Turn thee about, and from this height<br/>
                Back on the town direct thy sight.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Out of the hollow, gloomy gate,<br/>
                The motley throngs come forth elate:<br/>
                Each will the joy of the sunshine hoard,<br/>
                To honor the Day of the Risen Lord!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">They feel, themselves, their resurrection:<br/>
                From the low, dark rooms, scarce habitable;<br/>
                From the bonds of Work, from Trade's restriction;<br/>
                From the pressing weight of roof and gable;<br/>
                From the narrow, crushing streets and alleys;<br/>
                From the churches' solemn and reverend night,<br/>
                All come forth to the cheerful light.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">How lively, see! the multitude sallies,<br/>
                Scattering through gardens and fields remote,<br/>
                While over the river, that broadly dallies,<br/>
                Dances so many a festive boat;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">And overladen, nigh to sinking,<br/>
                The last full wherry takes the stream.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Yonder afar, from the hill-paths blinking,<br/>
                Their clothes are colors that softly gleam.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">I hear the noise of the village, even;<br/>
                Here is the People's proper Heaven;<br/>
                Here high and low contented see!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Here I am Man,—dare man to be!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            To stroll with you, Sir Doctor, flatters;<br/>
            'Tis honor, profit, unto me.<br/>
            But I, alone, would shun these shallow matters,<br/>
            Since all that's coarse provokes my enmity.<br/>
            This fiddling, shouting, ten-pin rolling<br/>
            I hate,—these noises of the throng:<br/>
            They rave, as Satan were their sports controlling.<br/>
            And call it mirth, and call it song!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>PEASANTS, UNDER THE LINDEN-TREE</b>
        (Dance and Song.)
        <p>
            All for the dance the shepherd dressed,<br/>
            In ribbons, wreath, and gayest vest<br/>
            Himself with care arraying:<br/>
            Around the linden lass and lad<br/>
            Already footed it like mad:<br/>
            Hurrah! hurrah!<br/>
            Hurrah—tarara-la!<br/>
            The fiddle-bow was playing.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            He broke the ranks, no whit afraid,<br/>
            And with his elbow punched a maid,<br/>
            Who stood, the dance surveying:<br/>
            The buxom wench, she turned and said:<br/>
            "Now, you I call a stupid-head!"<br/>
            Hurrah! hurrah!<br/>
            Hurrah—tarara-la!<br/>
            "Be decent while you're staying!"<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            Then round the circle went their flight,<br/>
            They danced to left, they danced to right:<br/>
            Their kirtles all were playing.<br/>
            They first grew red, and then grew warm,<br/>
            And rested, panting, arm in arm,—<br/>
            Hurrah! hurrah!<br/>
            Hurrah—tarara-la!<br/>
            And hips and elbows straying.<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            Now, don't be so familiar here!<br/>
            How many a one has fooled his dear,<br/>
            Waylaying and betraying!<br/>
               </p>
               <p>
            And yet, he coaxed her soon aside,<br/>
            And round the linden sounded wide.<br/>
            Hurrah! hurrah!<br/>
            Hurrah—tarara-la!<br/>
            And the fiddle-bow was playing.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>OLD PEASANT</b>
               <p>
            Sir Doctor, it is good of you,<br/>
            That thus you condescend, to-day,<br/>
            Among this crowd of merry folk,<br/>
            A highly-learned man, to stray.<br/>
            Then also take the finest can,<br/>
            We fill with fresh wine, for your sake:<br/>
            I offer it, and humbly wish<br/>
            That not alone your thirst is slake,—<br/>
            That, as the drops below its brink,<br/>
            So many days of life you drink!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">I take the cup you kindly reach,<br/>
                With thanks and health to all and each.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
    (The People gather in a circle about him.)
    <br/>
               <b>OLD PEASANT</b>
               <p>
            In truth, 'tis well and fitly timed,<br/>
            That now our day of joy you share,<br/>
            Who heretofore, in evil days,<br/>
            Gave us so much of helping care.<br/>
            Still many a man stands living here,<br/>
            Saved by your father's skillful hand,<br/>
            That snatched him from the fever's rage<br/>
            And stayed the plague in all the land.<br/>
            Then also you, though but a youth,<br/>
            Went into every house of pain:<br/>
            Many the corpses carried forth,<br/>
            But you in health came out again.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">No test or trial you evaded:<br/>
                A Helping God the helper aided.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>ALL</b>
               <p>
            Health to the man, so skilled and tried.<br/>
            That for our help he long may abide!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">To Him above bow down, my friends,<br/>
                Who teaches help, and succor sends!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
    (He goes on with WAGNER.)
    <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            With what a feeling, thou great man, must thou<br/>
            Receive the people's honest veneration!<br/>
            How lucky he, whose gifts his station<br/>
            With such advantages endow!<br/>
            Thou'rt shown to all the younger generation:<br/>
            Each asks, and presses near to gaze;<br/>
            The fiddle stops, the dance delays.<br/>
            Thou goest, they stand in rows to see,<br/>
            And all the caps are lifted high;<br/>
            A little more, and they would bend the knee<br/>
            As if the Holy Host came by.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">A few more steps ascend, as far as yonder stone!—<br/>
                Here from our wandering will we rest contented.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Here, lost in thought, I've lingered oft alone,<br/>
                When foolish fasts and prayers my life tormented.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Here, rich in hope and firm in faith,<br/>
                With tears, wrung hands and sighs, I've striven,<br/>
                The end of that far-spreading death<br/>
                Entreating from the Lord of Heaven!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Now like contempt the crowd's applauses seem:<br/>
                Couldst thou but read, within mine inmost spirit,<br/>
                How little now I deem,<br/>
                That sire or son such praises merit!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">My father's was a sombre, brooding brain,<br/>
                Which through the holy spheres of Nature groped and wandered,<br/>
                And honestly, in his own fashion, pondered<br/>
                With labor whimsical, and pain:<br/>
                Who, in his dusky work-shop bending,<br/>
                With proved adepts in company,<br/>
                Made, from his recipes unending,<br/>
                Opposing substances agree.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">There was a Lion red, a wooer daring,<br/>
                Within the Lily's tepid bath espoused,<br/>
                And both, tormented then by flame unsparing,<br/>
                By turns in either bridal chamber housed.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">If then appeared, with colors splendid,<br/>
                The young Queen in her crystal shell,<br/>
                This was the medicine—the patients' woes soon ended,<br/>
                And none demanded: who got well?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thus we, our hellish boluses compounding,<br/>
                Among these vales and hills surrounding,<br/>
                Worse than the pestilence, have passed.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Thousands were done to death from poison of my giving;<br/>
                And I must hear, by all the living,<br/>
                The shameless murderers praised at last!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Why, therefore, yield to such depression?<br/>
            A good man does his honest share<br/>
            In exercising, with the strictest care,<br/>
            The art bequeathed to his possession!<br/>
            Dost thou thy father honor, as a youth?<br/>
            Then may his teaching cheerfully impel thee:<br/>
            Dost thou, as man, increase the stores of truth?<br/>
            Then may thine own son afterwards excel thee.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">O happy he, who still renews<br/>
            The hope, from Error's deeps to rise forever!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">That which one does not know, one needs to use;<br/>
            And what one knows, one uses never.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">But let us not, by such despondence, so<br/>
            The fortune of this hour embitter!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Mark how, beneath the evening sunlight's glow,<br/>
            The green-embosomed houses glitter!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The glow retreats, done is the day of toil;<br/>
            It yonder hastes, new fields of life exploring;<br/>
            Ah, that no wing can lift me from the soil,<br/>
            Upon its track to follow, follow soaring!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Then would I see eternal Evening gild<br/>
            The silent world beneath me glowing,<br/>
            On fire each mountain-peak, with peace each valley filled,<br/>
            The silver brook to golden rivers flowing.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The mountain-chain, with all its gorges deep,<br/>
            Would then no more impede my godlike motion;<br/>
            And now before mine eyes expands the ocean<br/>
            With all its bays, in shining sleep!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yet, finally, the weary god is sinking;<br/>
            The new-born impulse fires my mind,—<br/>
            I hasten on, his beams eternal drinking,<br/>
            The Day before me and the Night behind,<br/>
            Above me heaven unfurled, the floor of waves beneath me,—<br/>
            A glorious dream! though now the glories fade.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">Alas! the wings that lift the mind no aid<br/>
            Of wings to lift the body can bequeath me.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yet in each soul is born the pleasure<br/>
            Of yearning onward, upward and away,<br/>
            When o'er our heads, lost in the vaulted azure,<br/>
            The lark sends down his flickering lay,—<br/>
            When over crags and piny highlands<br/>
            The poising eagle slowly soars,<br/>
            And over plains and lakes and islands<br/>
            The crane sails by to other shores.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            I've had, myself, at times, some odd caprices,<br/>
            But never yet such impulse felt, as this is.<br/>
            One soon fatigues, on woods and fields to look,<br/>
            Nor would I beg the bird his wing to spare us:<br/>
            How otherwise the mental raptures bear us<br/>
            From page to page, from book to book!<br/>
            Then winter nights take loveliness untold,<br/>
            As warmer life in every limb had crowned you;<br/>
            And when your hands unroll some parchment rare and old,<br/>
            All Heaven descends, and opens bright around you!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">One impulse art thou conscious of, at best;<br/>
                O, never seek to know the other!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Two souls, alas! reside within my breast,<br/>
                And each withdraws from, and repels, its brother.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="earthly">One with tenacious organs holds in love<br/>
                And clinging lust the world in its embraces;<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">The other strongly sweeps, this dust above,<br/>
                Into the high ancestral spaces.<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">If there be airy spirits near,<br/>
                'Twixt Heaven and Earth on potent errands fleeing,<br/>
                Let them drop down the golden atmosphere,<br/>
                And bear me forth to new and varied being!<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">Yea, if a magic mantle once were mine,<br/>
                To waft me o'er the world at pleasure,<br/>
                I would not for the costliest stores of treasure—<br/>
                Not for a monarch's robe—the gift resign.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Invoke not thus the well-known throng,<br/>
            Which through the firmament diffused is faring,<br/>
            And danger thousand-fold, our race to wrong.<br/>
            In every quarter is preparing.<br/>
            Swift from the North the spirit-fangs so sharp<br/>
            Sweep down, and with their barbéd points assail you;<br/>
            Then from the East they come, to dry and warp<br/>
            Your lungs, till breath and being fail you:<br/>
            If from the Desert sendeth them the South,<br/>
            With fire on fire your throbbing forehead crowning,<br/>
            The West leads on a host, to cure the drouth<br/>
            Only when meadow, field, and you are drowning.<br/>
            They gladly hearken, prompt for injury,—<br/>
            Gladly obey, because they gladly cheat us;<br/>
            From Heaven they represent themselves to be,<br/>
            And lisp like angels, when with lies they meet us.<br/>
            But, let us go! 'Tis gray and dusky all:<br/>
            The air is cold, the vapors fall.<br/>
            At night, one learns his house to prize:—<br/>
            Why stand you thus, with such astonished eyes?<br/>
            What, in the twilight, can your mind so trouble?<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Seest thou the black dog coursing there, through corn and<br/>
                stubble?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Long since: yet deemed him not important in the least.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Inspect him close: for what tak'st thou the beast?<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            Why, for a poodle who has lost his master,<br/>
            And scents about, his track to find.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">Seest thou the spiral circles, narrowing faster,<br/>
                Which he, approaching, round us seems to wind?<br/>
                  </span>
                  <span class="divine">
                A streaming trail of fire, if I see rightly,<br/>
                Follows his path of mystery.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            It may be that your eyes deceive you slightly;<br/>
            Naught but a plain black poodle do I see.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">It seems to me that with enchanted cunning<br/>
                He snares our feet, some future chain to bind.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            I see him timidly, in doubt, around us running,<br/>
            Since, in his master's stead, two strangers doth he find.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">The circle narrows: he is near!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            A dog thou seest, and not a phantom, here!<br/>
            Behold him stop—upon his belly crawl—His<br/>
            tail set wagging: canine habits, all!<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="divine">Come, follow us! Come here, at least!<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            'Tis the absurdest, drollest beast.<br/>
            Stand still, and you will see him wait;<br/>
            Address him, and he gambols straight;<br/>
            If something's lost, he'll quickly bring it,—<br/>
            Your cane, if in the stream you fling it.<br/>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>FAUST</b>
               <p>
                  <span class="earthly">No doubt you're right: no trace of mind, I own,<br/>
                Is in the beast: I see but drill, alone.<br/>
                  </span>
               </p>
    
               <br/>
               <b>WAGNER</b>
               <p>
            The dog, when he's well educated,<br/>
            Is by the wisest tolerated.<br/>
            Yes, he deserves your favor thoroughly,—<br/>
            The clever scholar of the students, he!<br/>
               </p>
    
    (They pass in the city-gate.)
</section>
         </div>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
